[Amit Varma]: I began the introduction to my last episode by asking the question, how do we see the
[Amit Varma]: world? Well, I want to ask the same question today. How do we make sense of these complexities
[Amit Varma]: around us? One answer is that we can never truly see the world for what it is because
[Amit Varma]: it is so complex. But the best way to get a good sense of it is through getting as much
[Amit Varma]: knowledge as we can. Get all the data we can so we have more dots to join and hopefully
[Amit Varma]: we will emerge with a high definition picture. But sometimes dots aren't enough. How we join
[Amit Varma]: those dots also matters. Ideology can sometimes be an impediment. Every ideology presents
[Amit Varma]: simple answers to everything and simple answers are attractive. But when we see the world
[Amit Varma]: through these frames, we never quite take all the dots into account. That is why it
[Amit Varma]: is important always to be open minded to question everything. The only ism that can take you
[Unknown]: to the truth is skepticism. Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly
[Unknown]: podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Pramit Bhattacharya, a journalist
[Amit Varma]: who has been a pioneer of analytical journalism in this country or what would also be known
[Amit Varma]: as data journalism. Pramit joined Mint more than a decade ago, reported on markets, ran
[Amit Varma]: the edit page, did grassroots reporting, wrote opinion pieces and most importantly, set up
[Amit Varma]: the data journalism unit, Plain Facts. He played an important role in the careers of
[Amit Varma]: two other journalists who've been on the show before, Rukmini S and Roshan Kishore.
[Amit Varma]: And his pioneering work will continue to have an unseen effect on a generation of journalists
[Amit Varma]: to come. He is such a careful and meticulous thinker and also so principled in his approach
[Amit Varma]: to journalism. I enjoyed this conversation. I learned so much from this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: But before we begin listening to it, a quick message from the sponsor of this episode,
[Amit Varma]: which is me only. You can't get away from me. One of the things I've learned most over
[Amit Varma]: the last year and a half is sharing my insights on my two greatest passions, writing and podcasting.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd love to invite you to be a part of this journey. Registration is now open for
[Amit Varma]: the January cohort of the Art of Clear Writing, where over four webinars on four Saturdays,
[Amit Varma]: I teach all I know about the art and craft of writing compelling prose. Much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: many exercises. And at the end of it, you get to join the clear writing community, an
[Amit Varma]: online community formed by the 18 previous cohorts of this course. In that community,
[Amit Varma]: we have book clubs, workshops, writing prompts with feedback and much else. I am also doing
[Amit Varma]: a special cohort of my podcasting course, the Art of Podcasting, which I had conducted
[Amit Varma]: for three cohorts last year before I took a break. All my learnings from five years
[Amit Varma]: of the seen and the unseen in three webinars over three Sundays. For more details and to
[Amit Varma]: sign up for my writing course, head on over to IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing to sign
[Amit Varma]: up for my podcasting course, go to seen unseen.in slash learn. These links will also be at the
[Amit Varma]: bottom of the show notes. These are exciting times for the creator economy, and I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you be a part of it.
[Amit Varma]: Pramit, welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit. I'm a fan of your work, and it's really great to be on your show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks. That's so kind of you. And I'm a fan of your work as well. Not just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: reading Mint and all the things that you've been doing, but I've had two other data journalists
[Amit Varma]: Roshan Kishore and Rukmini on the show before, and they've also raved about you. So glad
[Amit Varma]: to finally have the OG, as it were, or OP. This new internet lingo sometimes confuses
[Amit Varma]: me but glad to have you on. You know, so before we sort of get down to talking about your
[Amit Varma]: field of work and all your insights over all these years in journalism, I'm curious to
[Amit Varma]: know a little bit more about your sort of background, like, where were you born? What
[Amit Varma]: were your early years life? Like, tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I was born in a small town called Tezpur, which is about 20 kilometers from
[Guest]: Guwahati in Assam. And my father was a college teacher. My mother was a homemaker. She was
[Guest]: a teacher earlier, but after marriage, this thing. So early years were just like a typical
[Guest]: small town existence and where everyone knew each other. Also partly stifling, because
[Guest]: a son of a college teacher in a small town is supposed to behave in a certain way, right?
[Guest]: You can't escape that. And so, I think it was only when I went to Guwahati for my undergrad,
[Guest]: this college called Cotton College, oldest college in the Northeast and one of its most
[Guest]: important culturally, politically and so on. So, for instance, the current chief minister
[Guest]: started his political career, current chief minister of Assam, Himanta Biswas Sharma.
[Guest]: So he started his career as a student politician in Cotton College, Guwahati. And while I was
[Guest]: there, even then, he was the cabinet minister. There were at least five others who were ex-general
[Guest]: secretaries of Cotton College. So we are all aware of the legacy and the history and so
[Guest]: on. And by the second year, I had moved into a hostel, the Cotton College hostel. Earlier,
[Guest]: I stayed privately. And when you are in a Cotton College hostel, there's no way you
[Guest]: can avoid politics. So I also plunged into it. And like most other students of Assam,
[Guest]: you first have your brush with student politics through the ASU, the All Assam Students Union,
[Guest]: which led that famous six-year-long agitation during the time of Indira Gandhi, which finally
[Guest]: led to the Assam Accord. So, if you are a student in Assam, you are quite active and
[Guest]: you're quite, your voice is heard, and especially in a place like Guwahati and Cotton College.
[Guest]: I think those years were sort of very influential in determining the sort of life I finally
[Guest]: had and the career choices I made and so on, in two ways. One was, of course, the brush
[Guest]: with politics. And even at that level, you see the use of muscle power, money power,
[Guest]: everything. And you see how hard it is to have to take an independent stand, which we
[Guest]: did eventually, but it came at a cost. And the candidate we put up for election was threatened
[Guest]: with a gun. And we went for a hunger strike, Gandhian sort of satyagraha against unknown
[Guest]: assailants. But we let it be known to everyone whom we knew that it was someone perhaps from
[Guest]: the ASU, because we had broken away from the ranks. And we also saw the impact of that
[Guest]: because after long years, ASU lost an election in Cotton College. And it was a big development.
[Guest]: So one could see that. And the other thing that happened parallelly was I got involved
[Guest]: in a lot of other college activities, a lot of platforms. And I, along with a few other
[Guest]: friends started the first magazine of the economics department. I renewed a magazine
[Guest]: that was used to be there in our hostel 30 years ago. So we picked out a couple of pieces
[Guest]: from the old magazine and then we started with that. We got a writer in Assam to sort
[Guest]: of come and inaugurate that theatre, one of the leading theatre sort of artists in Guwahati,
[Guest]: who was also a teacher in Cotton College to write for us for that this thing. So, and
[Guest]: we also went out to people to collect ads, like cat coaching centers and so on. So the
[Guest]: entire process of preparing a magazine. And when that first copy comes out of a printing
[Guest]: press, whose owner had been persuaded by one of our professors to produce these magazines
[Guest]: for a very cheap rate. So we got all kind of the entire infrastructure and everything
[Guest]: and doing all of these things on our own, managing budgets, commissioning pieces, editing
[Guest]: pieces and so on. So it was a great sort of learning experience. And then when finally
[Guest]: it came out, the response that we got, and I had written a piece which was very critical
[Guest]: of our hostel culture, you know, and the Gundaism that was prevalent even at that time. Although
[Guest]: I didn't use the word Gundaism, it was quite a harsh piece that we pick targets when we
[Guest]: know that all hostel boarders will go and, you know, fight for the local, we know what
[Guest]: the outcome is. So it is not that we're doing anything brave by doing that. And I had expected
[Guest]: backlash. Instead, people from other hostels came up to me and say that, you know, what
[Guest]: you wrote was right and so on. So I also noticed the power of words. And also during our political
[Guest]: fights and so on, we realized that, for instance, during that hunger strike, we were not getting
[Guest]: the kind of press support on the first day that we wanted to. And through our channels,
[Guest]: we found out that some senior folks in Assu had warned newspapermen not to. And if you
[Guest]: know how the system in Assam works, a lot of journalists have also come up through the
[Guest]: same ranks. Then we started making our own calls and used our students' family connections,
[Guest]: their village connections and so on to counter. And we got this thing and we also got some
[Guest]: independent interested journalists interested in our story. So I had been a sort of, I had
[Guest]: seen the other side of the news industry before, you know, I stepped into it and I knew both
[Guest]: the weaknesses of the model, of the news model, as well as the strength. So I didn't join
[Guest]: with any wide-eyed illusion that, you know, everything is hunky-dory and, you know, you
[Guest]: get to say what you want to and so on always. But I also realized that, you know, this has
[Guest]: some power and it can change minds. If you can put across your message in a convincing
[Guest]: way, words do carry a lot of weight. And then I also felt that along with all that, you
[Guest]: also need some amount of technical knowledge on a particular subject, which you need to
[Guest]: focus on. I was always interested in politics and economics. I had already decided to do
[Guest]: my undergrad in economics. I got admission into IGIDR, which is one of the premier institutes
[Guest]: for economics in the country. And after my IGIDR stint, I felt confident enough to, you
[Guest]: know, I felt that I was good enough to even challenge, you know, what some of the economists
[Guest]: were telling us about how the economy is moving, what things we should be worried about, what
[Guest]: things we should not be worrying about. And I had also learned how economists are able
[Guest]: to use data to game models and so on. So I didn't want to go into a data kind of thing.
[Guest]: In fact, I walked out of, say, corporate jobs, which involve data, partly because I always
[Guest]: wanted to have something, some writing role kind of a thing. And also because of this
[Guest]: sort of interest in to get into the real sort of this thing that pushed me, I think, towards
[Guest]: journalism. And that's how I sort of first stepped into financial journalism.
[Amit Varma]: That's incredibly fascinating. Many strands to pursue there. And, you know, you made Cotton
[Amit Varma]: College Guwahati almost sound like, you know, they say that all British prime ministers
[Amit Varma]: do a PPE from Oxford or Cambridge and all of that. And it kind of sounds like that.
[Amit Varma]: This is the whole ecosystem. This is where everybody comes from. So I'm actually going
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, talk about that phase in Guwahati a little bit more. But before I do a brief
[Amit Varma]: digression, I'm intrigued by what you said about how that experience taught you about
[Amit Varma]: the weaknesses and strengths of news and journalism and whatever. Can you elaborate a little bit
[Amit Varma]: on that?
[Guest]: Yes. So one was this raw use of power by the dominant system. You know, Asu at that point
[Guest]: in Assam politics was like what the Sangh is in India's politics today. In fact, more
[Guest]: because Asu had far more sort of influence and also credibility. Also because they led
[Guest]: the agitation. Remember, they were the original sort of revolutionaries. It was only those
[Guest]: who joined the political party and became AGP who were seen discreet. Asu still had
[Guest]: a lot of weight, even though stories about corruption in Asu had begun sort of leaking
[Guest]: out and there were journalists who were writing about it. So one was that. The other part
[Guest]: was that, see, we grew up in a time of militancy. For the first few years of my, almost till
[Guest]: cotton college, I've never celebrated Independence Day. That day is a day of protest in Assam.
[Guest]: Not now. I mean, when we were going for our generation. So for everything, there were
[Guest]: two sides. There was an independence movement, sub-nationalist, secessionist movement in
[Guest]: Assam, which had their own versions, own history, own story. And there was the nationalist India
[Guest]: mainstream story. And even, you know, if there's a conflict somewhere, you know, some guns,
[Guest]: some shots are fired, something happens, someone loses his life. The Assamese newspaper will
[Guest]: have, or some Assamese newspapers will carry one version, which is most likely the alpha
[Guest]: version. And the English newspapers will, on the same story, have a completely different
[Guest]: version, which will most likely be the army version. We knew from experience and from,
[Guest]: you know, things that happened locally, that neither versions were true. So what was true
[Guest]: would not necessarily come out in the newspaper in any form. And one had to live with it.
[Guest]: You couldn't do anything. Even if you wrote a letter to the editor, it was very unlikely
[Guest]: that that would get published with the truth. When I was in cotton college, then of course
[Guest]: we had the, you know, if you write as a group of cottoners to a letter, it is very unlikely
[Guest]: to refuse. So if something happens to a student from an elite institution and so on, then
[Guest]: it's a different thing. But something happens in a remote village, which is maybe not too
[Guest]: far from Tejpur, I know someone there and I know what the story was, that will not get
[Guest]: published in a newspaper in that form. So I saw what, how news, much of news, especially
[Guest]: conflict reporting, is sort of distorted news. I was very aware of that. And which is why
[Guest]: when people say that, you know, the future of news is local news and hyper-local news
[Guest]: and that will be great. There won't be pulse and pressures. I have never bought that because
[Guest]: I can see how parochial it is. And this came up even during my reporting in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: When I used to go from Bombay to a local place, say that was a constituency of a big cabinet
[Guest]: minister, the local reporter would tell me everything that has gone wrong in the constituency.
[Guest]: But when I asked him, how much of it have you reported in your own writing, they would
[Guest]: say zero. Because the local cabinet minister is also the chief ad buyer of the local newspaper.
[Guest]: So it's also the revenue model that works in a certain way. So at different places,
[Guest]: different systems provide money for news agencies and newspapers and so on. So there were rumors
[Guest]: that time, never proved that even Indian intelligence agencies paid money to ensure that news about
[Guest]: conflicts and so on was presented in a certain way. These things can be proved, at least
[Guest]: I didn't have the resources or this thing to pursue this. But there were other incidents,
[Guest]: secret killings, for instance, there are books now on that dark sort of episode in Assam's
[Guest]: history. So when you grow up in a place with such violence, such extreme events and such
[Guest]: distorted representation of such events and when you see even the mainstream media, the
[Guest]: so-called national media, completely oblivious or completely ignorant of those, you just
[Guest]: feel that there's no one really interested in the truth. The reality is far more complex,
[Guest]: but as a young sort of student or child, you feel that no one is just bothered with it.
[Guest]: Then as you grow up, you realize that what are the hurdles or barriers that prevent us
[Guest]: from reaching the truth, even if we are sincere as journalists. So that makes you more aware
[Guest]: of the nuances and complexities. But I didn't start out from a position where I respected
[Guest]: all the great institutions of the country, I had great respect for the army, I had great
[Guest]: respect for the national TV channels or the national newspapers and so on. No, I didn't
[Guest]: have. At the same time, I did not have great respect for the local sort of this thing also.
[Guest]: So it was a position of deep skepticism and maybe that's why I became a journalist. Here
[Guest]: we can question everything and although we can't probably say everything that needs to
[Guest]: be said and should be said, we can make an effort and gradually lower those hurdles and
[Amit Varma]: come a bit closer to the truth. So, you know, I'm also coming from like a position of deep
[Amit Varma]: skepticism on some things and one of the things that kind of strikes me is that all of this
[Amit Varma]: would make me wonder, and this is something I still wonder, whether there's any point
[Amit Varma]: to the pursuit of the truth that journalists like you and me would want to believe in.
[Amit Varma]: Because on the one hand, when you talk about the news media, on one hand, it's a there's
[Amit Varma]: a narrative impulse, you know, you're with one side or the other. And there is that impulse
[Amit Varma]: to push that kind of narrative. And that's what it is. And you don't really want to report
[Amit Varma]: anything else. And on the other hand, there is also the business impulse, you know, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you got to do what you got to do to stay profitable as a business. And if somebody
[Amit Varma]: is your big advertiser, you're obviously not going to piss them off. And these two things
[Amit Varma]: alone would make me skeptical. But what has made me more skeptical in recent times, is
[Amit Varma]: the fact that the common person doesn't seem to care about the truth, even they are happy,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they pick a side. And they'll go with whatever narrative chooses fits the vision
[Amit Varma]: of the world that they've chosen for themselves. And they'll just go with that. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the question then comes is, does the truth make a difference? Do people even really care?
[Amit Varma]: Which is an obviously, it's an open question for myself. Because, you know, what I, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I would, if I thought truth didn't matter, I would stop doing this podcast, why inquire,
[Amit Varma]: why not just choose your delusion as it were, and kind of live with it. So did these processes
[Amit Varma]: cross your mind, in the sense that what you have kind of done in journalism, the route
[Amit Varma]: that you've taken is not just in a broad sense, trying to figure the truth out, but trying
[Amit Varma]: to do it with data, trying to do it with granularity and trying to get as accurate as you can,
[Amit Varma]: and you know, peel away the layers of narrative and obfuscation that might otherwise lie behind
[Amit Varma]: events or processes. So, you know, have you ever been struck by this sort of skepticism
[Amit Varma]: that what's the freaking point, you know, I can bring up so much data about how the
[Amit Varma]: economy has done this quarter, but people will believe whatever the hell they want to
[Guest]: believe. Yeah, so those kind of doubts occur at least four to five times every month. So
[Guest]: I would be lying. But see, one always then reasons that maybe there's a mail from someone,
[Guest]: you know, who understands and who sort of pushes you. So if that kind of feedback also
[Guest]: stopped, then yes, I would be completely disillusioned. But over the years, I have always, as I said,
[Guest]: from right from my student life, you know, when even when I wrote things that I thought
[Guest]: people will make, will provoke people, make them angry, I would lose friendships because
[Guest]: of what I wrote. I didn't. And later on, it was not just not about friendships. Of course,
[Guest]: I was talking about powerful people and, you know, they were not my friends in any way.
[Guest]: But say when I was writing about economics and I was criticizing what economists were
[Guest]: doing and many of my friends are economists, you know, now they're senior economists because
[Guest]: they they're all batchmates or juniors or seniors from the same institution. But they
[Guest]: take it in a very, I should say, sporting manner and sometimes gently they will get
[Guest]: back to you and say, hey, you know, you are stretching this point a bit too much and so
[Guest]: on. But they engage and they're willing to acknowledge that, you know, some things are
[Guest]: not right or could be better and some kind of models should be rethought and so on. So
[Guest]: had those kind of reasonable, reasoned responses to my work not been there, I would definitely
[Guest]: have been or maybe I would have left the business of writing altogether. But thankfully, that
[Guest]: has not happened. Maybe I'm lucky in that respect. And so that is what sort of helps
[Amit Varma]: me continue despite those doubts. Yeah, you know, I totally vibe with that because while
[Amit Varma]: for example, you know, the scene and the unseen started as a labor of love, the engagement
[Amit Varma]: from people has been so deep that sometimes I feel I'm just doing it for that, that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, that people care so much and I can't let them down. So, you know, every Monday
[Amit Varma]: there's got to be a good episode and I have to do it with full intensity. Another question
[Amit Varma]: that arises from what you just said, you know, how all your economist friends will once in
[Amit Varma]: a while gently tell you what is this you have written and all that. And one of the laments
[Amit Varma]: that one has about the media, which I guess is a universal lament that one can't help,
[Amit Varma]: is that too many journalists are generalists, especially so in these times where budgets
[Amit Varma]: and all are being cut. And of course, you want one, but I want to sort of just ask a
[Amit Varma]: broader question that what happens when journalists are generalists, and one day you're reporting
[Amit Varma]: on X subject, another day you're reporting on Y subject, is that invariably, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the experts of the subject will be disappointed because they will think, oh, you know, like
[Amit Varma]: whenever I read an article written on say podcasting or poker, you know, sometimes some
[Amit Varma]: journalists who put in a lot of rigor and do a good job, but most of the time I'll be
[Amit Varma]: like this person doesn't know what he or she is talking about. Right. And even for a good
[Amit Varma]: journalist who is a semi expert who might have an economics degree like you, even when
[Amit Varma]: you are reporting on, say, the way that the RBI does a particular thing, someone from
[Amit Varma]: inside the RBI could easily say that, hey, you don't know the tugs and pressures on us
[Amit Varma]: and all the different things we have to consider. So how do you sort of weigh this? Because
[Amit Varma]: on the one hand, you want to do justice to whatever the subject is. You might even, I
[Amit Varma]: don't know if it happened to you, but you might even at some point suffer from the imposter
[Amit Varma]: syndrome and say, should I really be writing about this? And at the same time, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all these specialist friends of yours, economists or whatever, will often make valid points
[Amit Varma]: that you didn't consider this. So, you know, and yet, you know, that it is better that
[Amit Varma]: you do what you're doing than do nothing at all. Or then let somebody else who is completely
[Amit Varma]: untrained come at it with a random narrative they might have. So it's in a sense God's
[Amit Varma]: work you're doing. I'm an atheist. But in a sense, it's important work you're doing,
[Amit Varma]: it should be done. But at the same time, you know, you know that you can never, you'll
[Amit Varma]: never satisfy the experts. So how do you deal with this?
[Guest]: As far as, so I, the way I approached it, and thankfully I had good mentorship from
[Guest]: people who were equally respected by experts and so on. So they always told me that a good
[Guest]: story should be accessible to everyone. So a story on economy, even a 10th class student
[Guest]: should be able to understand it. But it should not disappoint the experts. So that was, that's
[Guest]: a high bar. Yeah, that's a high bar. And I don't think in 100% of my stories, I would
[Guest]: have met it. But I try, I mean, that is the ideal. So, and there are some genuine cases
[Guest]: where there is a lot of uncertainty and in economic sort of reporting, it is, it will
[Guest]: always be there. And it's a question of which sides, the majority of the consensus is, sometimes
[Guest]: there's no consensus. In those cases, it is always best to tell your readers so upfront
[Guest]: that there is no consensus. This is what you think based on all the evidence you have been
[Guest]: able to collect, all the data you have seen, all the experts you have spoken to, all the
[Guest]: research you have read. And after that, you basically leave it to the intelligence of
[Guest]: the reader to figure out. B, even after all these processes, you must still make mistakes.
[Guest]: The thing is to be humble. And next time when you approach that subject or any other subject
[Guest]: to be more careful and weave that in. So I have made mistakes and I've learned from them.
[Guest]: And when someone tells me that, hey, you could have looked at this way, I engage with them.
[Guest]: I do not brush it off. So, and over a period of time, I have been able to handle those
[Guest]: criticisms. I think more maturely, at least I feel so. There were points when I had fights
[Guest]: also with my professors. And I said, no, you're wrong. I know this, this, this, this happened
[Guest]: and this is how it worked out. And so this is why I'm correct. With hindsight, I would
[Guest]: have dealt with those sort of arguments much more maturely. But the good thing is they
[Guest]: did not feel that way that I was being too harsh. So they also were patient. So I think
[Guest]: I've been sort of lucky that I got a lot of good feedback from good people. And especially
[Guest]: in my early years, that helped me a lot, you know, it helped me improve. And even now,
[Guest]: it helps me improve.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to kind of go back to Assam for a bit. And I was in any case, very intrigued
[Amit Varma]: by your sort of growing up in Guwahati. Because you know, people who grow up in sort of the
[Amit Varma]: mainstream of the country, the big cities like Delhi and Bombay and whatever, India
[Amit Varma]: is one thing to them. And I realized that like, even from the kind of privilege bubble
[Amit Varma]: that I grew up in, that it takes a while for you to really see the world and the layers
[Amit Varma]: peel off. And over a period of time, you begin to realize that, you know, there are so many
[Amit Varma]: nuances and complexities about the country that you've missed. And one of those has also
[Amit Varma]: to do with the idea of India in the sense that not in the sense, you know, Sunil Killani
[Amit Varma]: may speak of it, or as is the current debate today, about inclusiveness and secularism
[Amit Varma]: and all that, not in that sense, but just the idea of India as one geographical union,
[Amit Varma]: as it is, like, one thing I realized while, you know, reading up on that period, I did
[Amit Varma]: an episode with Narayanini Basu on VP Menon, who helped Sardar Patel kind of integrate
[Amit Varma]: all the states, is that that process of integrating the states and building this union and making
[Amit Varma]: sure the center held, seemed to me at one level to be like a kind of fast track colonization,
[Amit Varma]: what the British took 250 years to do, these guys sitting in Delhi kind of managed to do
[Amit Varma]: in a few months, through threats, through coercion, through promises that were later
[Amit Varma]: broken and all of that. And that gives me unease. Now, I love this country. I call myself
[Amit Varma]: definitely not a nationalist, but definitely a patriot, a distinction Ram Guha keeps making.
[Amit Varma]: So I love this country. I'm glad that we are what we are. But I sometimes wonder about
[Amit Varma]: the road we took to get here. And that I imagine would especially be true for someone say,
[Amit Varma]: in Kashmir, in the Northeast, even in Assam, to some extent, because like so many Kashmiris,
[Amit Varma]: given what we have done there, you know, would in a sense, it would be understandable for
[Amit Varma]: them to look at the Union of India, as our freedom fighters must have looked at the British,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and it would be understandable. I'm not saying right or wrong, I don't want
[Amit Varma]: to go there. But it would be understandable for them to look at the Indian Army as an
[Amit Varma]: occupying force with all its oppressions and everything. Yes. And so what was that sense
[Amit Varma]: like in Assam? Like, did you have a different sense of India? Did you have these competing
[Amit Varma]: sort of senses of India in your head, this sub nationalism that you speak of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: how much of a force was that? Because we, we wear many caps, right? We'll wear an India
[Amit Varma]: cap, we'll wear an Assam cap, we'll wear a community cap, we'll wear a small town cap.
[Amit Varma]: And the world looks completely different if you just change one cap to another. So tell
[Guest]: me a little bit about how your thinking evolved. Yeah, so just to because you're talking about
[Guest]: caps, I'll respond to that. So the sub nationalist cap is quite important. And if you notice,
[Guest]: the headgear Modi wears when he goes for his rallies in Assam is very specific to that
[Guest]: place. And so he may refuse to wear whatever a Muslim headgear or something, but he will
[Guest]: not refuse to wear that Assamese headgear that people wear during farming actually,
[Guest]: but now it's a mark of respect and so on. So yeah, so that is very important and even
[Guest]: today it is important, but it is not as important today as it was when we were growing up. So
[Guest]: now Assam is much more integrated in that sense with the rest of the country. Maybe
[Guest]: Manipur isn't, maybe Nagaland is not to that extent, but the rest of the North Asian states
[Guest]: are much more integrated than they were 20 years ago. And on balance, I think it's a
[Guest]: good thing. So yes, they were competing visions, they were competing sort of ideologies about
[Guest]: what it means to be independent, what it means to be in India. And they were competing visions
[Guest]: even within Assam. So it was the dominant Assamese middle class that sort of provided
[Guest]: intellectual material financial support for the secessionist movement. Let us not forget
[Guest]: that the tribals had their own ideas, the linguistic minorities, the Bengalis, the community
[Guest]: I belong to had their own ideas. We actually wanted to celebrate Independence Day because
[Guest]: we were refugees from East Pakistan or at least we are descendants of those. So coming
[Guest]: to India was an active choice and although unlike in the case of refugees from West Pakistan,
[Guest]: there wasn't much done to alleviate the distress of refugees from this side and we are left
[Guest]: to the mercy of natural forces and Bengalis also had to suffer during the anti-outsider
[Guest]: agitation. But still this was preferable to what was happening in during even before 1971
[Guest]: in East Pakistan before in the lead-up to the creation of Bangladesh. So when you look
[Guest]: at the counterfactual A, that is there. B, let us look at the Assamese position because
[Guest]: see most of my friends are Assamese. So it's not that they are my class enemies or anything.
[Guest]: In fact, I did appreciate even then the Assamese position and they are right to be aggrieved
[Guest]: about the way the Indian state came into being, the way a sort of quasi-colonial mentality
[Guest]: still pervades in many things. I don't know if you are aware of this but so central government
[Guest]: employees have some kind of a hardship allowance if they go and serve in the north. Wow, that's
[Guest]: so convincing. And if you in certain institutions if you serve for five years then the for rest
[Guest]: of your life you don't have to go there. So people do it early in their career and then
[Guest]: before they get married or whatever then they moved out. So they actually see it as a punishment
[Guest]: kind of a thing before they go to more established things. So maybe the initial policy was to
[Guest]: encourage people to go. I don't know what was what are the origins of that but right
[Guest]: now it is perceived in a very different way. And so there are many of these things, you
[Guest]: know. So which is why there was a recent controversy where I think Himanta also stepped in where
[Guest]: a contestant from Assam in a reality show, someone said she was speaking in Chinese and
[Guest]: someone said something, a judge. But the judge, the full conversation was not shown, only
[Guest]: that part was shown and it immediately created controversy because you know people didn't
[Guest]: give the benefit of doubt to the judge and there are historical reasons why this is true
[Guest]: and even current, I mean even few years back the parts of Delhi were very unsafe for people
[Guest]: from the Northeast. So all these things are also there. But if you extend the logic of
[Guest]: the secessionists and the earlier sub-nationalists, there's no way Assam would have remained independent
[Guest]: for long even if they had managed to get it, suppose. Or say Nagaland, eventually it would
[Guest]: have been cobbled up by China. So then what would, you would not even be able to voice
[Guest]: whatever grievances you have, you know, the kind of things I'm saying now in your podcast
[Guest]: and which will be published, you know, I can only do this in India, I can't do this in
[Guest]: China. So, or much of my journalism. So while I do have a lot of, while I criticize the
[Guest]: way Indian state policy function in various ways, including its policy in the Northeast
[Guest]: and how wrong it was and how it wronged people, I also feel that this was the least worst
[Guest]: thing that could have happened. All other choices were much worse.
[Amit Varma]: So in this period of time, what I was also very intrigued by was, you know, when you
[Amit Varma]: think of a data journalist, right, you think of a numbers nerd, you know, the kind of guy
[Amit Varma]: who might get bullied in his hostel or the kind of introverted person and always, you
[Amit Varma]: know, studying algebra and all of those things and generally a numbers nerd kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: But when I chatted with, you know, Roshan Kishore, who's worked with you before, and
[Amit Varma]: he had a rich history of politics in the JNU student hostel. And now you also talk about
[Amit Varma]: your deep interest in politics, quite obviously, you know, during your college years. That
[Amit Varma]: really intrigues me. So what, what was your notion, you know, growing up at that time?
[Amit Varma]: And I guess this would have been early 2000s when you were in college?
[Guest]: Yes, 2005 to 2008, I was in my undergrad.
[Amit Varma]: You were in your undergrad. So in those days, what was your perception of yourself? In the
[Amit Varma]: sense, what was the idea of yourself? Like what, what did you want to be? Did you have
[Amit Varma]: a path stretched out? What were the things that you were passionate about at that age?
[Guest]: So I didn't have very clear ideas about that. This is what, but I knew what my interests
[Guest]: were. So even before I went to Cotton College, I knew I was clearly interested in economics.
[Guest]: And as I began studying economics, I got interested in statistics. I mean, I had a statistics
[Guest]: as a subject and in Guwahati University, the other courses are not that well developed,
[Guest]: but statistics historically has been a prominent subject. And so I really enjoyed my classes,
[Guest]: stats classes. I performed well in my stats courses as well, although it was a minor subject.
[Guest]: My major was in economics and economics I was always interested in. I was interested
[Guest]: in writing and I saw, you know, the impact it had. And I was also interested in politics.
[Guest]: But towards the end of my student, Cotton life, I realized that I couldn't make a career
[Guest]: out of politics. I mean, in an idealized sort of student campus, even there, we struggled
[Guest]: to sort of get our way. In the broader world, the dirtier sort of aspects of politics will
[Guest]: definitely have the upper hand. So, A, that was one. B, I also felt that, you know, there's
[Guest]: a broader politics that we all take part in, whether we are academics or journalists or,
[Guest]: you know, even as bureaucrats or anyone in any way connected with public policy. And
[Guest]: maybe the influence would be less, but over a period of time, maybe one could move the
[Guest]: needle a bit and maybe help others do better along that path and so on. So I had very sort
[Guest]: of vague ideas around that time. And I also had a sort of notion that I was very happy
[Guest]: with my statistics training, but I was not very happy with my economics training. I had
[Guest]: great teachers and they said that you should go to a place like IJDR and so on. Without
[Guest]: them, I would not have come here. So no complaints on that front. And they were very clear that
[Guest]: we can't give you, you know, all the things that you need. So, for instance, if you want
[Guest]: to do economic modeling well, you need to handle software, you know. And at IJDR, we
[Guest]: got that. Our very first econometrics teacher taught us coding. So those are things that
[Guest]: I picked up here. And I'm grateful for both. I think all the years in Cotton helped me
[Guest]: sort of figure out which are the possible paths I could take. And IJDR gave me that
[Guest]: solid footing, you know, where I could specialize and pick one aspect. And as I said, I knew
[Guest]: I couldn't succeed in politics anyway. So that was one. The other part was I wanted
[Guest]: to write. So I wanted something around that. And the third was I had a sort of self-doubt
[Guest]: and I wanted to see whether I could succeed as a corporate economist or an analyst or
[Guest]: something of that. So I did an internship with Citi in my first year. Much of it was
[Guest]: just coding. And I realized I didn't enjoy it. So it was the final proof that, OK, fine,
[Guest]: I can go for an unconventional career. My brother had an established corporate career
[Guest]: by that point. So I didn't have any family pressure to sort of pursue necessarily the
[Guest]: most lucrative option, which in IJDR is basically that you sit for placement. So I didn't sit
[Guest]: for placement and I searched for a job. It was difficult. I mean, today it seems that
[Guest]: I'm a successful journalist, but it was a bit difficult to get a break when I first
[Guest]: started out. Mint tried me out and they said, fine, you can come along. And so that's how
[Guest]: it happened. I don't think everything was planned in advance or I had, you know, a concrete
[Guest]: plan through which I just knew, discovered my interests and, you know, what I was good
[Guest]: at, what I was bad at, my strengths and limitations in a very real way during those Cotton College
[Guest]: experiences. Because, you know, dealing with so many people, so many tumultuous events
[Guest]: in your hostel, in your college, it gives you a sense of, OK, this is what you're good
[Guest]: at. This is what you're not. So so that I think helped me decide.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I was also struck by something you said during lunch where you mentioned that
[Amit Varma]: had your brother not had a corporate career, you wouldn't have been a journalist. And reason
[Amit Varma]: number one is, of course, you would have been under pressure to take up a more lucrative
[Amit Varma]: career where you could look after your parents. But also, you know, your first job in Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: he helped you pay the deposit because obviously he earned a corporate salary, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: which is, again, just a roll of happenstance, like somewhere in a parallel universe, you
[Amit Varma]: are doing something else entirely because your brother did something else entirely,
[Amit Varma]: which is so fascinating. I want to double click on a couple of thoughts that struck
[Amit Varma]: me while you were talking about, you know, your journey in college. And one of the things
[Amit Varma]: you said was that you realized at one point that even though you were very interested
[Amit Varma]: in politics at the college level, you realized at one point that it becomes a different beast
[Amit Varma]: when you're out in the wider world and it's not for you and there are other interests
[Amit Varma]: you have. So you go on to do them. And I wonder then that if in our politics there is a process
[Amit Varma]: of self-selection that weeds out the best and keeps the worst, because then the guys
[Amit Varma]: who remain are the people who have the kind of skills at playing those dirty games which
[Amit Varma]: you are required to play to rise up in actual real world politics outside the college campus,
[Amit Varma]: on one hand, and the other way this effect would work is that if you are good at something,
[Amit Varma]: like in your case, it would be you have a deep passion for economics and writing and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, and you decide to pursue that, somebody else could be, you know, could say,
[Amit Varma]: hey, I'm smart enough to do an MBA and become a banker, whatever it is, if you're good at
[Amit Varma]: something that is a much safer option and you won't go the political route either. So
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, is that selection process and guaranteed to bring a particular kind of person
[Amit Varma]: into politics and does that become a problem? And I'm not, I'm not, I'm not understating
[Amit Varma]: the skills involved in actual politics. You require tremendous skills, a certain kind
[Amit Varma]: of street smartness, a certain kind of project management. So all of that, I totally have
[Amit Varma]: huge respect for politician. Yeah. So in that sense, in that sense. Yeah. But otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: do you think in terms of, you know, the things we just mentioned that do you think there's
[Guest]: a selection process that selects a particular kind of person? Unless you're born into a
[Guest]: political family, unless you're really privileged or unless India's per capita income moves
[Guest]: to that level where the average person or the average middle class person can also afford
[Guest]: to take such risks. At the end of the day, it's a huge risk. So we at least were not
[Guest]: courageous enough to pursue those risks. So I think, I don't know if that answers your
[Amit Varma]: question, but it kind of does. I mean, it would indicate that there's a selection process
[Amit Varma]: of circumstance also there, that if you are, you know, if you have the privilege that you
[Amit Varma]: don't need to have a regular income and you can follow your interest in politics as it
[Amit Varma]: were, then you go in for it. But if you're not from that background, you are automatically,
[Amit Varma]: you're not going to do it. You know, unlike, you know, earlier, we brought up the whole
[Amit Varma]: thing of British prime ministers doing PPEs from Oxford and Cambridge. And there is a
[Amit Varma]: completely different scenario where there is a perfectly respectable thing for someone
[Amit Varma]: who's done his PPE and, you know, could get a job in any bank in the country, for example,
[Amit Varma]: to say, no, I'll be a politician instead. And it's not what it is. And I think India's
[Amit Varma]: political system probably has a lot to do with that as well. The other thing that I'm
[Amit Varma]: struck by is you mentioned how, you know, you edited your hostel magazine, Jowar, and
[Amit Varma]: you were into writing as well, and all of that. And you also mentioned earlier that
[Amit Varma]: your dad was a teacher and your mom had also been a teacher before she chose to become
[Amit Varma]: a homemaker. So how much of an influence did books have in your growing up? Like what kind
[Amit Varma]: of books were you reading when you were growing up? Was there a sense of wanting to be a writer
[Amit Varma]: even outside of the context of economics and journalism and all of that? You know, tell
[Guest]: me about this sort of relationship with words as it were. Yes, so I definitely read a lot.
[Guest]: And as I said, when you are in Tejpur, then you can't do kind of things which I did in
[Guest]: Guwahati, right? You have to be, you know, you have to behave in a certain very straight
[Guest]: jacketed way. So then you spend more time at home. And then your home is filled with
[Guest]: books because your father is a teacher, mother is an ex-teacher, and they both read, they
[Guest]: still read a lot. And you absorb, I mean, and it was not any planned reading. You pick
[Guest]: up whatever it is. Sometimes my father would say that you won't understand this, it's not
[Guest]: for your age. And in fact, I would pick up those books. And the other thing was newspapers.
[Guest]: So we always had more than one newspaper in the house. We had different magazines. And
[Guest]: in fact, before my high school leaving exam, someone asked my mother, how is Pramit preparing
[Guest]: and how is this thing going? My mother can be very sarcastic if she wants to. So she
[Guest]: said that, see, if they ask questions about what India Today is writing, what Frontline
[Guest]: is writing and so on, you will get 100 on 100. But the problem is that the examiners
[Guest]: don't know that they should ask this question. So I'm not sure what Pramit will do with the
[Guest]: real questions he has to face in the exam. So, so yeah, so both non, those kind of nonfiction
[Guest]: writing and in books, it was largely fiction. I don't think I read that much of nonfiction
[Guest]: at that age. And maybe I read many books that usually people of that age don't read. And
[Guest]: yes, there was a, this is very strange. This is, there's a phase where I thought I was
[Guest]: a communist because I had read Maxim Gorky's Mother. And then the next year, I decided
[Guest]: I had become a capitalist because I think I read Ayn Rand or someone else. And later
[Guest]: on thinking about this, it seems that I was just silly and stupid. I'm going off in one
[Guest]: direction and weaving this thing of how I will bring a revolution and the next year
[Guest]: I'm going completely different. But in general, I think it just shows that I have always been
[Guest]: very skeptical of any one thing. Or even if I flirt with an idea or toy with a sort of
[Guest]: ideology for some time, it has not stuck really for a long time. And the Cotton College thing,
[Guest]: we were an independent group, you know, that was the reason we existed. And that was the
[Guest]: reason others were attracted to us. We were not part of any political grouping, neither
[Guest]: ASO nor NSUI. So, so I think, yeah, books were there and also books led to certain thoughts
[Guest]: and books, politics, culture, all of this sort of combined. Economics, I think, came
[Guest]: a bit later, maybe when I was around class nine. It is interest in politics, actually,
[Guest]: that led to interest when I realized that many of the questions, conflicts that I was
[Guest]: seeing around myself were related to land, were related to jobs, the lack of industrialization
[Guest]: of the state. That's when I started sort of thinking about this a bit more harder and
[Guest]: feeling that I need to know and understand this economic aspects a bit more. And even
[Guest]: in while reading newspapers, I felt that I didn't understand the economic op-eds very
[Guest]: well. So that was also an urge that, you know, I should be able to understand everything
[Guest]: in a newspaper, right? I didn't feel that the economists were writing in a very jargon
[Guest]: field or this thing. I thought that was the standard. Now I know that the writing could
[Guest]: also have been better. But at that point, I felt that I need to crack this. So that
[Guest]: also, I think, led me to economics.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's very fascinating, because like I went through a similar process, there
[Amit Varma]: was a period in time where I would carry marks in my college rucksack, and I thought I was
[Amit Varma]: a communist, and then you go in different directions. And this is something that kind
[Amit Varma]: of interests me about how one forms one's views of the world. And I kind of grew up
[Amit Varma]: in the 80s and early 90s. So a significant chunk of my life was, in fact, pre-liberalization.
[Amit Varma]: And you don't have access to the internet or to so many different kinds of views from
[Amit Varma]: across the world and all of that. And I was probably lucky that I didn't study economics
[Amit Varma]: in college, because I couldn't be brainwashed into one way of thinking. So I was kind of
[Amit Varma]: completely open. But by the time I began to form my views of the world and began to figure
[Amit Varma]: things out for myself, I was well into adulthood. So what was that formation like? Like, I don't
[Amit Varma]: just mean in terms of ideology, because as you've just mentioned, you could be skeptical
[Amit Varma]: about all ideologies and, you know, not fall into the sway of either of them alluring as
[Amit Varma]: they might be because they seem to offer simple explanations for the way the world works.
[Amit Varma]: But even if you're questioning them, you know, everyone has a lens through which they view
[Amit Varma]: the world, which could be a complex lens with many factors to it. And it evolves over time
[Amit Varma]: where you build your judgment and you which help you see what the world is like. So what
[Amit Varma]: was it like for you to sort of build that lens through which you could look at the world?
[Amit Varma]: And this must be, I suppose, a process doubly complicated, because there are all these old
[Amit Varma]: dogmas that we've kind of, which are there in the environment, including, I suppose,
[Amit Varma]: if you're studying economics from your colleges or whatever, the received wisdom, the notion,
[Amit Varma]: the things you take for granted, till you learn to question them. So what was this process
[Amit Varma]: of forming, you know, your view of the world and the way that you, you know, view things
[Guest]: around you? In the early years, it was largely questions
[Guest]: around politics that dominated. So I didn't think that hard about economics, economic
[Guest]: criteria, just apart from that brief phase, from class 8 to class 9, which some people
[Guest]: might feel that, you know, it's a very early phase to think about these things, but it
[Guest]: happened with me. I don't know why. So after that, it was just trying to understand and
[Guest]: studying it as a subject and so on. And I got also very interested in statistics, as
[Guest]: I said. In Assam, you can take statistics as a subject in class 11 also. At that time,
[Guest]: it was there. And as I said, there's a good tradition of that. And in my college, it was
[Guest]: also, again, questions on politics that dominated. And I didn't form a particular world view
[Guest]: other than being anti-Asu in my final years. When I moved to IJDR, I also had a sort of
[Guest]: distance from Assam in that sense, right? And IJDR is a very, exactly the opposite of
[Guest]: Konkan College. So I did get admission into JNU also. I didn't want to go there because
[Guest]: I didn't want an extension of the same life I was having. So I did want a break. So it
[Guest]: was a conscious choice as well. And my parents were also, of course, very happy because they
[Guest]: were tired of all this activism. They saw my sometimes my picture in some protests or someone
[Guest]: would call them and say that, you know, they've seen me holding a placard.
[Guest]: So in IJDR, I began sort of questioning myself and what do I really believe in? And even
[Guest]: then there were sort of people who were left-leaning, Keynesians. And there were people who were
[Guest]: on the, who were quite market leaning, if not market fundamentalists. In fact, our first
[Guest]: we had two macro courses in the first year. Macro one was by a Keynesian, macro two was
[Guest]: by an anti-Keynesian. So we had that. And this happened throughout. In my final semester
[Guest]: in the morning, we had a lecture by someone who told us in the first class, you have to
[Guest]: unlearn a lot of what you've learned from your other professors. And he made us do surveys.
[Guest]: He was very interested in this ground level and it helped. Like even now, a lot of my
[Guest]: understanding of survey comes because I actually did a fairly intensive survey, right from
[Guest]: pilots, redoing questionnaires and everything. So that was in the morning. In the evening,
[Guest]: we were in a finance class where we were studying stock markets, how to value assets, bond pricing
[Guest]: methods and so on. So it was just a contrast. And I grappled with these questions. I had
[Guest]: debates with my professors. The good thing about IJDR is professors give you a lot of
[Guest]: time. The student quality teacher was very favorable and we were a batch of 20 or something
[Guest]: and there were 30, I mean, including junior and senior, there must have been more than
[Guest]: 20 professors for sure. And so we got a lot of time. You could just mail someone that
[Guest]: I want to drop in and it was not fixed. Like later when I want to study abroad, you know,
[Guest]: you had to take appointment for fixed windows and so on. That was not the case there. And
[Guest]: you could discuss random things, including these things, Cold War, economic ideology,
[Guest]: liberalization, how that has helped or harmed and so on. So a lot of my ideas got sort of,
[Guest]: and in that sense, I feel IJDR was a very heterodox place. And this I'm saying with
[Guest]: the benefit of hindsight. At that point, it didn't feel that way. I felt at that point
[Guest]: that IJDR was perhaps a bit too right-leaning. Right-leaning not in the social or political
[Guest]: sense, but in the economics. And it should offer more space to left-leaning thought.
[Guest]: So I did graduate out with that view. And the second thing that shaped my worldview
[Guest]: was the Lehman crash, because I entered the program in 2008. And I remember when Lehman
[Guest]: crashed that day, one of our professors came and said in class that this is a crazy day,
[Guest]: but this is also a great day for economists, because now we'll know what will happen. So
[Guest]: it's a natural experiment. And that, if you remember, it led to a sort of student movement,
[Guest]: at least in the West, where they demanded changes in the economics curriculum. People
[Guest]: walked out of the classes of Mankiw, who was seen as a conservative economist in the West.
[Guest]: So nothing of that scale happened here. But within the student community, there was a
[Guest]: lot of discontentment about the models we are taught, about some of the neoclassical
[Guest]: assumptions, about not being taught very more heterodox sort of. So I did feel that we need
[Guest]: exposure to more such, more different and diverse views. But somehow I'd never transitioned
[Guest]: into the left camp, if I may put it that way. Like on balance, I still felt that the market
[Guest]: approach worked best, at least as far as production was concerned. When it came to distribution,
[Guest]: I did favor a heavy role of the state, especially in education and health care, especially in
[Guest]: a country like India and seeing what I had seen. But other than that, I did think there
[Guest]: was a big role for market forces. Maybe I myself was a beneficiary of liberalization
[Guest]: in many ways, and I couldn't deny that. And gradually I have sort of rebalanced. I have,
[Guest]: I think, I have over the years begun to lean a bit more on the right. That also happened
[Guest]: after my King's education, because at that point I was contemplating giving up economics
[Guest]: writing and the pursuit of this sort of tracking the economy or tracking what was happening
[Guest]: there and do something else. And I wanted this interdisciplinary course that they offered.
[Guest]: It was, it was like an academic sabbatical and I got a fellowship and I did a thesis
[Guest]: which was on political economy, political economy on nutrition and nutrition was already
[Guest]: interesting. I had got a previous fellowship from Save the Children, Hindu Sun Times to
[Guest]: cover nutrition. So I wanted to understand the right to food movement and its reception
[Guest]: in Delhi, how bureaucrats, planning commission, etc. That time planning commission was still
[Guest]: there. I mean, not while I was doing it, but when the right to food movement went strong
[Guest]: and there were conflicts between them, between finance ministry and them. So I tried to sort
[Guest]: of make sense of that. And during our coursework and everything, I was exposed to readings
[Guest]: in sociology, in political science, across the social sciences and had come with a very
[Guest]: wide-eyed sort of admiration for other social sciences. I thought that, you know, economists
[Guest]: were this, you know, strange guys who just relied on modeling, didn't actually know what
[Guest]: was happening in the real world, whereas other social scientists were more closer to reality.
[Guest]: Then I discovered it was not the case. And I discovered that it was partly the methodological
[Guest]: sort of imperatives of economists, including the attention to data, that actually helped
[Guest]: economics stay close to reality. And a left-leaning economist and a right-leaning economist can
[Guest]: still argue and still agree on the method, even if they disagree with the conclusion.
[Guest]: That is very hard to achieve in sociology or political science. The level of debate
[Guest]: and engagement is far lesser. There are these schools of thought around a particular individual
[Guest]: and his work, and it is very hard to come out of that unless that person dies or retires
[Guest]: or holds no considerable sway in academia. So I came out of that economics distrust,
[Guest]: and I had much more sympathy now for my former professors and for my friends who are still
[Guest]: in economics. And that's when I decided to return to sort of data journalism, pursue
[Guest]: the study of the economy in a much more rigorous fashion. And at the same time, I won't say
[Guest]: that I didn't learn anything from sociology. There is nothing that economists have to learn.
[Guest]: No, that's wrong. Economists do have a lot to learn from other social sciences, and so
[Guest]: do journalists. But just that I felt, A, my comparative advantage lay here. I couldn't
[Guest]: possibly do much there. And it is easier for you to establish yourself there. And it is
[Guest]: also, even generally, it is easier for economics and economists to accept new ideas, to observe
[Guest]: new ideas, then perhaps it is the case for most others. So just to give a simple example
[Guest]: of this, I don't know if you remember, there was this famous Reinhart Rogoff paper on public
[Guest]: debt. And it was a conservative sort of view that if public debt to GDP crosses 90%, that's
[Guest]: the threshold they identified, the country is in trouble. Now, a few years back, a graduate
[Guest]: student in I think Amherst University or somewhere asked them for the data, found a big mistake
[Guest]: in their Excel calculations, and also some of their modeling work. The Excel, of course,
[Guest]: got much more media attention because it was like these two great economists made an Excel
[Guest]: mistake. It was not just that. And the whole debate shifted after that. People accepted
[Guest]: that there may not be such an arbitrary threshold. Although public debt to GDP ratio is something
[Guest]: that is worth tracking, and beyond a point, it may cause trouble for an economy. There
[Guest]: may not be a 90% kind of arbit threshold for all economies. It depends on the context,
[Guest]: it depends on various other forces, including geopolitical forces, that determines whether
[Guest]: it will land into a debt trap or not. And that told me, it was around the time I was
[Guest]: contemplating all these things, and that told me that, look, it is unimaginable that a graduate
[Guest]: student in any other discipline, at least in social sciences, will be able to challenge
[Guest]: one of the leading experts in a field. No, that's not going to happen. So, there is more
[Guest]: openness here than I was willing to previously admit. So, that sort of brought me back into
[Amit Varma]: the fold. You mentioned sort of Keynesians and anti-Keynesians, and that reminds me of
[Amit Varma]: this great rap video, Keynes vs Hayek. Have you seen it on YouTube? No. I'll put a link
[Amit Varma]: to it on the show notes. It's basically Keynes and Hayek battling in rap against each other.
[Guest]: And the lyrics are written by someone who's been a guest on the show, Russell Roberts,
[Guest]: who does a podcast. Yeah, I know Russell. Yeah. So, Russ has done the lyrics for that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's fantastic. I'll link it from the show notes. And you also mentioned about how,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the influence of someone may be so strong that until he dies, three words
[Amit Varma]: are used, you know, it may remain that way. And this reminded me of the quote about how
[Amit Varma]: paradigms change one funeral at a time. Yes. Which is really interesting. You can't change
[Amit Varma]: people's minds, but you can educate a new generation of people, hopefully, and that
[Amit Varma]: changes. Something else you said reminded me of a quote that seems completely unconnected
[Amit Varma]: from all of this. But I'm going to read it out. It's by the great writer Italo Calvino.
[Amit Varma]: And he's got this book called The Literature Machine. And he has an essay in that called
[Amit Varma]: philosophy and literature. So I just want to read out a little bit of it, it may seem
[Amit Varma]: to have no relevance to what you do, but I think it actually has a lot of relevance.
[Amit Varma]: And Calvino writes, quote, philosophy and literature are embattled adversaries. The
[Amit Varma]: eyes of philosophers see through the opaqueness of the world, eliminate the flesh of it, reduce
[Amit Varma]: a variety of existing things to a spider's web of relationships between general ideas,
[Amit Varma]: and fix the rules according to which a finite number of pawns moving on a chessboard exhaust
[Amit Varma]: a number of combinations that may even be infinite. Along come the writers and replace
[Amit Varma]: the abstract chessmen with kings and queens, knights and castles, all with a name, a particular
[Amit Varma]: shape and a series of attributes, royal equine or ecclesiastical. Instead of a chessboard,
[Amit Varma]: they roll out great dusty battlefields or stormy seas. So at this point, the rules of
[Amit Varma]: the game are turned topsy turvy, revealing an order of things quite different from that
[Amit Varma]: of the philosophers. Or rather, the people who discover these new rules of the game are
[Amit Varma]: once again the philosophers who dash back to demonstrate that this operation wrought
[Amit Varma]: by the writers can be reduced to the terms of one of their own operations, and that the
[Amit Varma]: particular castles and bishops were nothing but general ideas in disguise, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this seems to be to be two interesting approaches of the world, which are not contradictory,
[Amit Varma]: which can come together. But the philosophers approach that he describes, it seems to be
[Amit Varma]: to get meta, to look at a particular subject and figure out general rules, like philosopher
[Amit Varma]: economists may talk about, say, supply and demand and how they behave in particular ways,
[Amit Varma]: or they might talk about how monetary supply you increase that and you might have inflation
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, you have these broad general meta rules. And at the same time, the sort
[Amit Varma]: of the literature people as it were, would be people who are looking more closely at
[Amit Varma]: concrete immediate things that are happening. Perhaps people working in data journalism
[Amit Varma]: like you who are actually looking at all the data at a minute level at a local level, fleshing
[Amit Varma]: out the general picture that the philosophers, so to say, may come up with. Now, here I find
[Amit Varma]: when one thinks of economics, when one writes about economics, you have these two frames
[Amit Varma]: that are operating and one frame is a meta frame, where you have rules of the game and
[Amit Varma]: you can disagree about rules of the game depending on whether Keynes or Hayek or whatever, but
[Amit Varma]: you have a meta frame. And the other frame is this complex, messy world where nothing
[Amit Varma]: seems to fit and where all kinds of mad things happen. So, you know, as someone who is an
[Amit Varma]: economics journalist who looks into data, what is your mindset? You know, how do you
[Amit Varma]: stop one kind of thinking from impinging on the other? Because there must be times where
[Amit Varma]: the correct thing is to look, sit back and look at the broad picture and try to figure
[Amit Varma]: out the way the whole machine works from first principles. But there must also be times where
[Amit Varma]: you want to ignore that frame and just dive deep into the complexity of the problem and
[Amit Varma]: look at look at people as people and not as numbers and try to get more particular. So
[Guest]: how's that sort of journey been for you? Yeah, that's an interesting question. So I'll answer
[Guest]: it in two parts before I get into my journey, what I think about this question in general,
[Guest]: which is that at least as students of economics, we are fortunate that there have been great
[Guest]: economists of the likes of Milton Friedman, Samuelson of different ideologies, but who
[Guest]: have been excellent communicators. So if you read some of the writings, I mean, they would
[Guest]: put an economics journalist to a shame. They are very clear about what they are saying
[Guest]: and it is not filled with jargon and so on. In India, maybe we have less of such examples,
[Guest]: but in the West, I mean, if you follow English, you can follow their work. So one is that
[Guest]: and Samuelson, for instance, has also published very technical papers, right, where the writing
[Guest]: is completely different. So they were making conscious choices and they felt that both
[Guest]: were important, their role as public intellectual and their role as someone who was advancing
[Guest]: the discipline. Milton Friedman did not have that big an impact on economic theory, to
[Guest]: be honest. I know a lot of Friedman fans may be disappointed by hearing this, but Samuelson
[Guest]: definitely had much greater impact on the economics profession as such, in that sense,
[Guest]: not as a public intellectual. As a public intellectual, both were equals, I guess. And
[Guest]: I think both of them around the same time, for the same set of years had columns, I think,
[Guest]: on opposite pages of the Time magazine or something. So yeah, so one is that, that you,
[Guest]: so even theorists like Samuelson who work on this meta-narrative and this general sort
[Guest]: of framework, they relax those theoretical assumptions when they deal with concrete problems,
[Guest]: right, because they also know the limitations of the theory. In fact, good theorists do
[Guest]: know the limitations. They do not expect the real world to behave that way. It is only
[Guest]: bad and mediocre theorists who think that this is how it will work out. So one is that.
[Guest]: The second part is my own journey has been much more ad hoc and this thing, as I said,
[Guest]: I reacted to my IJA course in a very sort of different way. I felt that, you know, this
[Guest]: was inadequate and to some extent it was a letdown. And so I need to figure out for myself
[Guest]: how things work. And so first I felt that I should understand financial markets. That
[Guest]: was, that was a primary imperative. And although we had a very good finance teacher, you can't
[Guest]: understand markets unless, you know, you speak to people who are participating in it. So
[Guest]: I became a market reporter and it was fun for a while. But after one year, one and a
[Guest]: half years, I felt that I was doing the same kind of stories. And I do tend to get bored
[Guest]: after a point, you know, in fact, this data journalism thing is the longest thing I've
[Guest]: done. And that is also because within data journalism, you can do a lot, you can innovate
[Guest]: and this was a new thing. So you're given a lot of freedom and you could work out different
[Guest]: things. But after that market stint, and because I had got that Malnutrition Fellowship, I
[Guest]: had got the taste of long form reporting. I decided that I need to move out and do things
[Guest]: on my own. And it was that period when I was not doing too many stories, but, you know,
[Guest]: maybe I was doing two stories a month or three stories in two months. And I was given that
[Guest]: freedom and occasionally I was contributing to this online view section, which had come
[Guest]: up with Nayanjan was heading. And Nayanjan was my boss and he was a very sort of open
[Guest]: kind of a boss. So he allowed me to travel to some rural place in Maharashtra for five,
[Guest]: six days, and then come back and write one story. So I had those kind of, I mean, Mint
[Guest]: allowed me to do all that after a couple of years of market reporting. And that phase
[Guest]: also I think was critical because I got to see for myself many of the things that was
[Guest]: there on the ground. And I also then got to appreciate the role of data and research.
[Guest]: That was the turning point actually. Because even in market reporting, I did use numbers,
[Guest]: but I didn't look at it as, you know, as a very key component or very, this was something
[Guest]: one had to do. And so I did, I was like any other reporter that you put a chart along
[Guest]: with your story and then you figure out what is the right chart and do it. So, and I knew
[Guest]: I was good with numbers. So it was something even if I didn't have a very good, you know,
[Guest]: story that came from my sources, I knew I could always pull out a trend story. So it
[Guest]: was something like a backup. It was never something primary. And even when I went into
[Guest]: the field to do long form writing, it was with that, that I don't want to do this numbers
[Guest]: thing. But when I encountered questions in the field, which I could not answer with primary
[Guest]: observations with my field work, by just talking to people, then I realized the importance
[Guest]: of data, especially when I had to leap from my observations in the field to something
[Guest]: generic or general about the economy or the country. And that is when I realized that,
[Guest]: you know, I had perhaps exaggerated what we generally tend to dismiss as just numbers
[Guest]: or, you know, just people modeling and coming up with anything. So I realized that there
[Guest]: is good modeling and bad modeling. There is good empirical work versus bad. There's good
[Guest]: research versus bad. And I became more sensitive. I had a more nuanced sort of view of that.
[Guest]: And that is when I decided to sort of come back to analytical writing. I started writing
[Guest]: editorials and op-eds and so on. And then started this data journalism sort of began
[Guest]: from that. In particular, there's one story, I think, which I just thought I will mention
[Guest]: because I was thinking, you know, it sort of struck me. So there was this controversy
[Guest]: around B.T. Cotton. I don't know if you remember around 2011-12. So this was 10 years of B.T.
[Guest]: in India. And there was a lot of, there was also a documentary being made. I think it
[Guest]: was not fully made that time about farmer suicides, which laid the blame on basically
[Guest]: on B.T. Cotton. And there was a lot of writing around that. And I felt that this needed investigation.
[Guest]: And I was already traveling to the countryside that time and done some stories on various
[Guest]: farm related issues. I was among the first to write on farmer producer companies, which
[Guest]: now have become commonplace, but at that time was not. And some of my contacts and sources
[Guest]: have told me that, you know, this is one big thing. And this is destabilizing agriculture.
[Guest]: And this GM lobby is pushing ahead, although GM crops are a failure. And I began with that
[Guest]: as the starting premise, which got strengthened after my first sort of meeting, which was
[Guest]: in Monsanto, because they were based in Bombay. So even before I traveled, I met them. Monsanto,
[Guest]: of course, is the most famous GM company. And I met them with a certain amount of skepticism.
[Guest]: But when they offered to sponsor my visit to Vidarbha and said that we'll pay for it,
[Guest]: I just lost my, you know, I just lost it. And I was polite to them, but I was really
[Guest]: startled. And I said that I went with the aim of sort of exposing them, if I may put
[Guest]: it that way. When I landed in Vidarbha, I spent quite a few days there. First in a village
[Guest]: called Dorli that in 2005 had declared that the entire village was up for sale. So it
[Guest]: was a stunt to attract attention. And a lot of people, a lot of reporters have gone there.
[Guest]: I found in the villages there and the farmers there did not have very negative, strong negative
[Guest]: opinion against BT cotton as such. In fact, the profits had gone up since they used it.
[Guest]: In some other villages, they had problems, but it was not BT per se. There were various
[Guest]: other problems. They had to take loan from moneylenders, the water, you know, Vidarbha
[Guest]: has erratic rainfall. So often the rains fail and then the crop fails. And in some cases,
[Guest]: yes, they felt that the price of the seeds was too high, but that did not come out of
[Guest]: the primary factor. It was at best a secondary factor. So I thought what was happening. And
[Guest]: then I began to look closely at people who had led me to that story, to the NGOs they
[Guest]: worked with. And I know I'm saying this at a moment when NGOs are in, you know, facing
[Guest]: a lot of heat and not necessarily for the right reasons. So I want to qualify that not
[Guest]: all NGOs are like that. And I have worked, I've come across, in my reporting, I've come
[Guest]: across many NGOs who are not like that. But in this particular case, let me be clear.
[Guest]: I did feel that they were most likely getting funds from the organic lobby to prevent GM
[Guest]: crops from finding a foothold in India, although that was not what the farmers wanted. So building
[Guest]: on that, I then went, came back to Mumbai, looked at the numbers, and I saw that yield
[Guest]: had actually gone up. The instances of farmer suicides in Vidarbha had actually peaked in
[Guest]: the late 90s, much before BT cotton was introduced. When I looked at the data for five years after
[Guest]: BT, five years pre-BT, just the exact five years, there's not much difference. Statistically,
[Guest]: it was almost insignificant. And in fact, the post-BT was slightly lower. That low may
[Guest]: not be this thing, but at least it did not cause a spike. The spike happened much earlier.
[Guest]: Then I looked at numbers for Gujarat, which is another cotton producing state. There the
[Guest]: yields had grown phenomenally. So there were two BT stories, not one. And I was getting
[Guest]: to hear only one. So then I researched more, and then I planned a trip to Gujarat. I met
[Guest]: people there. And even before going to Gujarat, I realized that, by the way, this story has
[Guest]: a Narendra Modi connection. So it's a bit long, but I have time.
[Guest]: So see, genetically modified crops came to India in the late 90s. They began applying
[Guest]: for approvals and so on. And there was a lot of skepticism even then. Then the way the
[Guest]: BT cotton seeds are developed is, it is through a hybrid. So two crops have to be cross-pollinated
[Guest]: and that cross-pollination has to happen under local conditions. Otherwise, that seed will
[Guest]: not work under local conditions. So those happened in Gujarat, not Gujarat. And some
[Guest]: of the companies involved there, either through that or through some other sources, got hold
[Guest]: of those trial crops and seeds. And suddenly Gujarat was flooded with illegal BT seeds,
[Guest]: which were not certified, which had not got the approval, but which farmers bought. And
[Guest]: in 2001, I think, around the time Narendra Modi became chief minister of Gujarat, there
[Guest]: was a huge ball worm attack. And BT is supposed to protect against. This was 2002. I actually
[Guest]: wrote a column about this. Go ahead. Yeah. Sorry. This is so long back. And I did the
[Guest]: story in 2012. So some of my numbers and dates may get mixed up. And they realized that this
[Guest]: was working because the illegal crops succeeded, whereas everything else failed. And Monsanto
[Guest]: got wind of it and they complained to the genetic engineering approval committee. They
[Guest]: also took it up with the agriculture ministry. They took it up with the state government
[Guest]: in Gujarat and they demanded that those crops be burnt. The farmers protested and given
[Guest]: Mr. Modi's understanding of politics, he realized that if he burnt, allowed crops to be burnt,
[Guest]: what would be his fate. So he said that, okay, we'll put a ban on illegal crops and we'll
[Guest]: not allow them to be sold, but we're not going to burn the existing crops. And Monsanto had
[Guest]: to accept it. But that didn't happen. Illegal seeds got a life of their own. And what that
[Guest]: meant was that the terms of sale were also different. So because you're not buying on
[Guest]: a receipt, farmers did not need to pay anything upfront. If the crops failed, they did not
[Guest]: need to pay anything. So under that premise, illegals, and at one point it was like 50-60%
[Guest]: of the market. Monsanto had a lower share than this Desi sort of this thing. So one
[Guest]: was that. The other was the soil condition. Gujarat was much better and conducive. Water
[Guest]: supply was better and water supply had improved over time. That helped the boom in cotton
[Guest]: in Gujarat, partly because of Mr. Modi's efforts and partly because of non-governmental organizations
[Guest]: which had organized water harvesting schemes and so on. So it was a combination of various
[Guest]: things, but BT was certainly not the culprit. In fact, the seed market structure was such
[Guest]: that it actually favored the farmers. Whereas in Vidarbha, because it was one single monopoly
[Guest]: and they could dictate the price and the conditions under which it was selling, farmers had to
[Guest]: pay upfront. The situation was quite different and coupled with weather conditions, soil
[Guest]: conditions, credit conditions, credit also was much more easily available in Gujarat
[Guest]: than in Vidarbha. So a combination of all these institutional factors, various other
[Guest]: factors produced this difference. And so when I came back and wrote the story, it was not
[Guest]: an anti-Monsanto piece at all. It was a story of what was actually happening and how in
[Guest]: fact the NGOs were not giving up or showing us the truth. Not just NGOs, even a parliamentary
[Guest]: standing committee on GM crops at that time had decided to completely ignore this question.
[Guest]: I remember I had a conversation with Vasudev Acharya, who was a CPM MP and the chairman
[Guest]: of the standing committee on agriculture. And I asked him this question that BT is just
[Guest]: one part of the seed. It is just one protein that prevents against ball worm. The rest
[Guest]: of the performance of the crop depends on the cultivar, the variety that is being used
[Guest]: or where you are putting in that gene or changing that gene. So, did you consider the role
[Guest]: of cultivars, you know, because the scientists, agricultural scientists in Vidarbha told me
[Guest]: that had they not used those kind of hybrids, the situation would have been different. So
[Guest]: it is not just about BT, the kind of thing in which the cultivar, in which the BT thing
[Guest]: is being put in. And he was just blank for some time and he said that we have listened
[Guest]: to so many testimonies, no one raised this question, which I found hard to believe. So
[Guest]: that either means that they were talking to the wrong people or that they chose to bypass
[Guest]: scientific evidence. And then I realized there is a professor in Cornell University, Ronald
[Guest]: Herring, who has done work on this, on the politics of organic farming and anti-GM crops.
[Guest]: And I wrote to him and he said that what the parliamentary committee in your country has
[Guest]: done is nothing unique or exceptional. This has happened in many places. So I ended up
[Guest]: in a place very different from where I started with. And I could do that because of a mixture
[Guest]: of things. It was not just data, but data played a critical part. And also, you know,
[Guest]: primary observations, speaking to people, looking at research, looking at wider research
[Guest]: and so on. So it really made me question a lot of things. It also taught me how to do
[Amit Varma]: things better.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fantastic illustration because it also, you know, shows you the importance of
[Amit Varma]: the skeptical mindset that, you know, too many journalists I see will often go into
[Amit Varma]: a story with a narrative already in their head. Like a Monsanto is evil narrative could
[Amit Varma]: easily have been your narrative. And they're not open to that changing. And that becomes
[Amit Varma]: a problem because they're only looking for things that confirm that narrative and not
[Amit Varma]: looking for things that go against it. I wrote a column a while back, which I'll link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes called Farmers, Technology and Freedom of Choice, a Tale of Two Satyagrahas.
[Amit Varma]: And I find this story really inspiring because what really happened is, as you were pointing
[Amit Varma]: out, just to sort of recap for my listeners, as the 90s came to an end, cotton farmers
[Amit Varma]: in India were having a tough time because bollworms were ravaging crops across the country.
[Amit Varma]: Farmers had to use increasing amount of pesticides to keep them at bay. The cost of the pesticide
[Amit Varma]: went up, the labor involved was also costly, and the crops would fail anyway. And then,
[Amit Varma]: you know, this whole illegal BT cotton seeds kind of came about. And in 2002, all cotton
[Amit Varma]: crops in Gujarat failed, except 10,000 acres that had BT cotton. And like you just pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, the government did not say, hey, this is a model that has worked, they instead said
[Amit Varma]: destroy all of these, which was crazy. And at around that time, Sharad Joshi, the great
[Amit Varma]: farmer leader, leader of the Shetkari Sangatana in Maharashtra, he took about 10,000 farmers
[Amit Varma]: from Maharashtra to Gujarat, and they did their Satyagraha thing there. And eventually,
[Amit Varma]: the ban on BT cotton was lifted by the center. And the thing here is that GMO crops...
[Guest]: Yeah, I forgot to add that. The ban on GMO was lifted because of the illegal seeds, because
[Amit Varma]: of the efficacy of the illegal seeds. Exactly. Yes. So which is fabulous. And the thing to
[Amit Varma]: note here is number one, and I'll give a link to my column, but number one, GMO crops are
[Amit Varma]: completely safe. GMO foods are completely safe. Don't kind of believe the lobbies. Enough
[Amit Varma]: science has been done on this. And they're not only completely safe, they've helped humanity
[Amit Varma]: in terms of just increasing agricultural productivity, stopping people from starving, just incredible.
[Amit Varma]: The other point you mentioned about the NGOs is absolutely correct. We should have the
[Amit Varma]: hashtag not all NGOs, that there are tons of NGOs which do incredible work and which
[Amit Varma]: I admire greatly. But whenever we are sold a particular narrative, we should follow the
[Amit Varma]: journey. It is true that a lot of NGOs are incentivized by where they get their funding from to pick
[Amit Varma]: the most alarmist narrative so that their funding continues or increases. So we should
[Amit Varma]: be wary of alarmism in absolutely any sphere and we should examine everything with the
[Amit Varma]: kind of skeptical eye that you sort of brought to this. So now, you know, you mentioned that
[Amit Varma]: in college, the first thing your econometrics teacher taught you at IGIDR, I think you said
[Amit Varma]: was coding, right? A part of it is understanding statistics, a part of it is having the tools
[Amit Varma]: to work with. And now you're in journalism and you take data seriously. Because they
[Amit Varma]: shed light on things that personal reporting can't. So how did you go about building your
[Amit Varma]: data skills? And earlier, like at one point, you said that people talk about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can torture statistics and to tell them any story you want. And you can give models
[Amit Varma]: are such a big problem. And you pointed out, look, that's not true. There are good models
[Amit Varma]: and there are bad models. There are good ways to use stats and bad ways to use stats. So
[Amit Varma]: elaborate a little bit on that on your sort of education and understanding that what are
[Amit Varma]: the things you should do with numbers? And what are the things you should not do with
[Amit Varma]: numbers? Like, where do you get a sense of best practices from, especially given that
[Amit Varma]: this particular field, the kind of data journalism that in a sense you pioneered at Mint was
[Amit Varma]: so new. So it's not like there are role models and there are teachers like internationally,
[Amit Varma]: of course, I'm sure they are. But how does this process work, where you figure out your
[Amit Varma]: own best practices that these are the things we shall do. These are the tools we shall
[Amit Varma]: use. And these are the pitfalls to avoid.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a good question. So this was exactly the question that was that troubled
[Guest]: me when this push came to start this. And I think I've mentioned this earlier also somewhere.
[Guest]: I was skeptical when they said that you start this data journalism thing, something dedicated
[Guest]: to it. I was open by then to the use, increasing use of data in newsrooms and in stories and
[Guest]: so on. But this dedicated data journalism business, I had strong doubts. And even now
[Guest]: I don't very much like the term data journalism. You know, I prefer either analytical or statistical
[Guest]: journalism. But this is what people understand. So now I have accepted it. And so they said
[Guest]: like they meaning basically Niranjan and Ravikrishnan. Niranjan was my boss and the executive director
[Guest]: meant now he's with IDFC. Ravikrishnan is now the deputy executive director at Money
[Guest]: Control. Earlier, he was the Bombay bureau chief. And before that, he was in a team called
[Guest]: Mark to Market, which was the markets group, market analysis group. I was in the views
[Guest]: team at that time, writing edits and op-eds and so on. So the two of us were basically
[Guest]: tasked with starting this. And we had constant debates and discussions and so on, mostly
[Guest]: at Niranjan's house with lunch sponsored by him. And this was something that I constantly
[Guest]: raised that, you know, there's a great chance that we'll go astray. A lot of data is completely
[Guest]: untrustworthy. So we should not make strong inferences from them. They'll be wrong and
[Guest]: they will be proved wrong in the course of time. So because we all of us were keen that
[Guest]: what we said was not just true that day. We don't want to prove them wrong the next day.
[Guest]: We want it to have a certain shelf life beyond the typical newspaper story. So we all agreed
[Guest]: on that. So thankfully there was agreement on what we were setting out to do. We're just
[Guest]: trying to figure out the mechanics. So we came up with some broad guiding principles.
[Guest]: We did not have a fully fleshed out and listed sort of this and this came later. And I'll
[Guest]: come to that. Based on our collective experiences, our work with data and Niranjan himself has
[Guest]: used data in his work and at the same time is also very skeptical of, you know, much
[Guest]: of the modeling sort of approach. So there was a lot of agreement in some of the basic
[Guest]: guardrails. One of which was that it has nothing to do with data. It's basic journalism, but
[Guest]: which we practice religiously in plain facts. Maybe others do it to some extent, maybe not.
[Guest]: I don't know. But which we did is that we will never trust a report on a report. Right?
[Guest]: If someone has said that this number is coming from World Bank report or this thing, we'll
[Guest]: go and check whether the World Bank report actually says this. This is a very basic thing.
[Guest]: It has nothing to do with statistics. But that is one mistake that people make and,
[Guest]: you know, editorials get written about stuff which is actually fake news or zombie statistics
[Guest]: as they say, which doesn't exist. And there are Niti Aayog reports which have quoted World
[Guest]: Bank studies, which are not there. So I think in that respect, Planning Commission had better
[Guest]: checks. So we can't trust Niti Aayog documents to that extent as maybe things will change
[Guest]: once the institution ages. So we put that in. The second thing was that whatever statistical
[Guest]: tools or indices or calculations we do should be accessible to a class 10 student. So we
[Guest]: will use mean, median, mode, percentage, percentage difference, scatter plots, etc. Everything
[Guest]: that a class 10 student of that time understood because the math syllabus and even some basic
[Guest]: statistics is now taught even at school level. And a lot of things are now available at school
[Guest]: level. So we won't go beyond that. For anything else that requires those kind of modeling
[Guest]: or this thing, we felt that that's not suitable for newsroom because it requires some amount
[Guest]: of peer review and which we can't provide. So for those cases, we will rely on other
[Guest]: economists who have already done some work, maybe on past data, historical data, and we'll
[Guest]: look at research precisely for that to inform our analysis. And third, we'll stick, therefore
[Guest]: we'll just have to stick to largely descriptive statistics. And this came also again from
[Guest]: our collective experience that when any of us spoke to policy makers, whether they be
[Guest]: politicians or bureaucrats or senior people influencing policy, none of them ever said
[Guest]: that I was impressed by, you know, that regression coefficient 3.35 and not 0.25 in that previous
[Guest]: model and hence change my policy. Aisa kabhi nahi hota hai. So most people look at trends,
[Guest]: most policy makers also look at descriptive numbers. If the broad trends point in various
[Guest]: directions, then they go for a certain policy choice. And the fourth thing which policy
[Guest]: makers also did and which we tried to incorporate in our work is to always look at multiple
[Guest]: data sources. If multiple data sources are pointing towards the same trend, then we can
[Guest]: be reasonably certain and confident. So I always used to say when I had people, got
[Guest]: them into a team, that there's a cousin who's a doctor who once told me that among doctors
[Guest]: there's this thing that they say that if a doctor has made an extraordinary diagnosis,
[Guest]: it is most likely that he's extraordinarily wrong. If the previous test says something
[Guest]: and his test or whatever checkup said something else, then he should actually be careful.
[Guest]: So I said the same thing to report. If a new claim, whether it be in a research report,
[Guest]: whether it be from a source or whether you have come up with your own analysis of the
[Guest]: data, is saying something extraordinary, it is most likely that it is extraordinarily
[Guest]: wrong. So please reinvestigate. Which is in a way is not told in as many ways either to
[Guest]: science journalists or to data journalists always. Sometimes they go with, suppose a
[Guest]: new paper has come up which is challenging the entire thing, it is more newsy, right?
[Guest]: It is very hard then to resist the temptation of playing it up. Whereas we sort of inculcated
[Guest]: that deliberately. So we put in such guardrails and of course we refined over time and some
[Guest]: of these things we sort of communicated and conveyed in a much more clearer with examples.
[Guest]: Because by the time when we started doing our work, we came up with these examples and
[Guest]: these examples became more real. So for instance, the Niti Aayog report was a real report. I
[Guest]: don't remember what it was about but there was this report which I think one reporter
[Guest]: from Washington Post had pointed out. She had done a whole thread on how it was actually
[Guest]: a zombie statistic. It wasn't there. So similarly when I did my work on nutrition, lot of data
[Guest]: that people tended to first look at was ICDS data which is collected by the administrative
[Guest]: machinery and which is wrong because the ICDS official has always an incentive to under
[Guest]: report and that is why you rely on an independent survey which is conducted not by the WCD women
[Guest]: and child ministry but by the health ministry which does not have an incentive to. So we
[Guest]: made it a sort of generic rule that whenever you encounter a data set which is collected
[Guest]: by the same agency which is supposed to be responsible for changing policy or making
[Guest]: recommendations be very careful because it has an incentive to doctor those numbers or
[Guest]: even if not doctor, they come in as a sort of an administrative process where the incentive
[Guest]: is not to report truly. We saw that with COVID death statistics as well. It was much later
[Guest]: that the real numbers or even the registered numbers came up and even with COVID infections
[Guest]: we didn't know and there were huge state level variations. So those are things in other examples
[Guest]: from other sectors we already had learnt and we put in place so that when the time comes
[Guest]: we do not make those mistakes. So those are things, combination of reading, engaging with
[Guest]: other people, speaking to people who work with data and speaking also with people who
[Guest]: use data and have sort of made such mistakes in the past and can caution us not to make
[Guest]: those mistakes. So combination of all of those things I think helped us sort of frame certainly
[Guest]: and despite all that I said we also made some mistakes but we learnt from them and we corrected
[Guest]: ourselves and those also came up in our sort of workbook that we should avoid.
[Amit Varma]: So personally how was this process for you because what's happening here is in the span
[Amit Varma]: of just a few years you've joined as a reporter covering the capital markets and then you
[Amit Varma]: move on to doing this other kind of journalism and then you're looking after the edit page
[Amit Varma]: and you're commissioning op-eds and writing opinion pieces and then you're into data and
[Amit Varma]: then you're asked to set up this division. So in a sense you've kind of, not exactly,
[Amit Varma]: it's not a great metaphor but it's the first one which came to me. From a hunter you've
[Amit Varma]: now become a gamekeeper in a sense that you've become a manager of people now. You're not
[Amit Varma]: just a journalist going out on the field using all these tools but you're also a manager
[Amit Varma]: of journalists who is formulating almost in real time as mistakes are happening, as one
[Amit Varma]: is learning, who is formulating the code of conduct by which they work, who is formulating
[Amit Varma]: best practices, who is giving shape to the processes which they must follow and you must
[Amit Varma]: also follow and during this time you are also still a journalist.
[Amit Varma]: So what was this process like for you because what I've often found is that these are almost
[Amit Varma]: two entirely different skill sets that, you know, doing the job and then actually managing
[Amit Varma]: people are completely different and it's very hard to find an intersection between someone
[Amit Varma]: who can kind of excel at both. So what was this journey like for you, Ulav?
[Guest]: Yes, so there were, as you said, it was a mixture of various things. One was, as you
[Guest]: said, forming our own rules. There was no one to do that for us. So we were sort of
[Guest]: charting our own path and creating the rules ourselves. It was crazy. But it was fun, that
[Guest]: part. Then there was this part that, you know, you are either writing new kind of stories
[Guest]: or helping shape those stories. That was also very, you know, it was a fun experience and
[Guest]: it was not that my previous experiences were not coming into play. So everything that I'd
[Guest]: done as a market reporter, as a sort of development writer, all of that was shaping the stories
[Guest]: on the economy, on public policies, on politics that I was editing or commissioning or getting
[Guest]: others to write or myself writing. So all of that flowed in. The hard part I think was
[Guest]: becoming a sort of, at that time as an assistant editor, but practically a sort of co-editor
[Guest]: of the team. And then eventually I became the data editor. So that also meant managing
[Guest]: people and that was tough. I mean, I was myself a very young journalist at that time. In fact,
[Guest]: I had once complained, went up to Niranjan and told him that, look, nothing much of my
[Guest]: own writing is happening. You have put me into this thing where, which I'm no longer
[Guest]: enjoying and just because you forced me, I'm doing it and I want to quit. So he said, don't
[Guest]: be silly. You don't have to quit or anything. You can still stay in Mint and continue doing
[Guest]: what you were doing before. We'll make a departmental this thing. I'll speak to Sukumar, who was
[Guest]: the editor and this thing and we'll figure it out. You don't have to do anything because
[Guest]: I'm forcing you or if you feel that I'm forcing you. But that conversation helped me cool
[Guest]: down, calm down. Then Niranjan said gently, you know, in his usual, this thing that see
[Guest]: from me, this is something you will have to do at some point of your life or the other.
[Guest]: So maybe you feel it is a bit too early, but this was a skill, as you said. Initially I
[Guest]: did not look at it as a skill and that was my mistake. Then I began to sort of view it
[Guest]: more seriously. So I feel I have been a better mentor to some of my colleagues who joined
[Guest]: later than to some of the colleagues in my early sort of years. So that is some one regret
[Guest]: I do have. And had I had greater experience or had I been prepared for a transition to
[Guest]: that kind of a role, I would have approached things differently or with the benefit of
[Guest]: hindsight, I would not have done several things or communicated in a way that I did or been
[Guest]: more clear in exactly how to do things. So that again, it was a self-taught, self-driven
[Guest]: sort of process. And so in the later years, it was much more easier. And also as Plainfax
[Guest]: brand got established, we got fantastic talent coming in. So that also made a huge difference.
[Guest]: You know, you didn't have to work at a very basic level with them. You know, they would
[Guest]: already do certain work and then you push it up to an even higher level. So we got fantastic
[Guest]: people, you know, people like Roshan, for instance. And the other thing we always insisted,
[Guest]: which I mean, which was not a guardrail for journalism, but generally because of my own
[Guest]: experience in getting into journalism, I always wanted the gates for data journalism to be
[Guest]: open. So if you notice, whenever we have vacancy, we make a public announcement, which is not
[Guest]: so common in journalism, but which is quite common among data journalists. And I think
[Guest]: it is because of us. In the early years, we put out ads in places like EPW with disastrous
[Guest]: consequences. But later on, Twitter and all these things picked up, LinkedIn. So we could
[Guest]: put out ads there and we got a very diverse kind of variety of candidates who applied.
[Guest]: And in fact, the selection process took up a huge amount. Because if 100 people are applied,
[Guest]: you need, first of all, some criteria to filter out. Then you need to do tests. And I am a
[Guest]: strong believer in the written test over an interview for various reasons, including the
[Guest]: fact that a written test balances the playing field more than interview, especially if someone
[Guest]: is coming from a background where he's not so comfortable in spoken English and so on.
[Guest]: We did change all that. And some of those practices also seeped into other teams and
[Guest]: other newsrooms and so on. People ask me, how do you approach hiring and so on in other
[Guest]: institutions, even in think tanks and so on. So it was very good to see that, you know,
[Guest]: and people saw the kind of people who came and joined us, worked us. There was attrition
[Guest]: also. So people left and they got fantastic offers as well, because journalistic work
[Guest]: is very public work, right? People see your byline, you're doing great work. And especially
[Guest]: data work can be applied in a number of fields. And people have gone on to join investment
[Guest]: banks, think tanks. Someone like Roshan has set up his own team. Vishnu, who had come
[Guest]: in from J-PAL, he went on to another think tank. Now he's in the economist data team.
[Guest]: Harsha, who had a very good visual sense and did many of our maps, redid many of our pages.
[Guest]: He joined a startup and now he's back to Colombia to study data journalism. So different people
[Guest]: pursue different paths. But the point is, all of them came with and they all came from
[Guest]: different backgrounds, different training and so on. But the common point was they were
[Guest]: all interested in numbers. They wanted to tell a story as rigorously, as accurately
[Guest]: as possible. They were all united in the common vision that we'll make this as simple as possible
[Guest]: for our readers and offer as compelling an experience as we could through the use of
[Amit Varma]: words, numbers and graphics. Fascinating. I should point out to our listeners that the
[Amit Varma]: Niranjan you keep referring to is Niranjan Rajadaksh, you know, who was a managing editor
[Amit Varma]: at Mint for the longest time. In fact, he gave me my column in Mint, which later won
[Amit Varma]: the Basia Prize circa 2007 when they first started. So wonderful editor, wonderful human
[Amit Varma]: being, I should have him on the show sometime. He keeps making polite noises every time I
[Amit Varma]: ask him, but maybe if he's listening to this Niranjan, your time is coming soon. And also
[Amit Varma]: what you said about learning about management, looking at it as a skill. And I actually went
[Amit Varma]: through that because the first time I found myself in a with managerial responsibility
[Amit Varma]: was in the mid aughties where I was a managing editor of Crickinfo. And so suddenly, you
[Amit Varma]: know, one day you're a star writer and the next day or whatever, you're managing people.
[Amit Varma]: And I simply wasn't good at it. But I didn't think of it specifically like I sort of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in Calvino's words, to go back to that, I took the literature approach to it. And
[Amit Varma]: it was all messy and complex, but I didn't take the philosopher approach to it, where
[Amit Varma]: I should have sat back, got meta, formulated certain rules on how to behave, how to deal
[Amit Varma]: with people, how to whatever, I didn't do all of that. So I sucked. But when I did this
[Amit Varma]: brief stint as which lasted, I think, a couple of years as editor of Pragati the policy magazine,
[Amit Varma]: I think I was the best boss in the world, because I had really thought it through how
[Amit Varma]: I should kind of handle those kinds of responsibilities. I'm also struck by what you said about many
[Amit Varma]: of the people who worked with you going on to, you know, economist data team or corporate
[Amit Varma]: job or, you know, a think tank, Roshan set up his own team. Do you sometimes think of
[Amit Varma]: roads not taken by you? Because you could also have done any of that I'm sure corporates
[Amit Varma]: would have, if not many of us certainly been glad to have you, you know, look after their
[Amit Varma]: whole analytical team and all of that your skills could be incredibly more lucrative
[Amit Varma]: in other professions. But instead, you are sort of here in journalism. So do you think
[Amit Varma]: of roads not taken? And if it is the case that you've made a conscious choice to stick
[Amit Varma]: with this because you love it? What is it that you think makes you do that? Like I just
[Amit Varma]: did an episode which, you know, on the day we are recording it, my episode with Abhinandan
[Amit Varma]: Sekri released. And one of the things I was struck by was that a lot of the things he
[Amit Varma]: did in media, he doesn't like to call himself a journalist, but a lot of the things that
[Amit Varma]: he did in media and as a media entrepreneur, was driven not so much by a desire for profit
[Amit Varma]: or the bottom line, as would be the case with many entrepreneurs. But because he was like
[Amit Varma]: shit, this has to be done. And my question to him, therefore, was that is your journalism
[Amit Varma]: in a certain sense, an extension of your activism? Is it a form of activism? And I feel like
[Amit Varma]: asking you the same thing. Because at one level, you were interested in politics in
[Amit Varma]: your college years, you were engaged with the world and trying to bring about change.
[Guest]: Is this an extension of that? Very good question. And so, to be completely
[Guest]: honest, in the early years, it was an extension of activism. I wanted to first, of course,
[Guest]: figure out how things run and how to make a mark as a journalist, how to write and so
[Guest]: on. But I was pretty sure when I joined that once I did that, I would do my own propaganda
[Guest]: and change the world. And that sort of early sort of expectation is not unusual. I've had
[Guest]: people who had similar, so expressed similar beliefs and thoughts. And it should be there,
[Guest]: I think, in an early age, if it is not there, then there is something missing in you. But
[Guest]: that illusionment, disillusionment all happens within a span of a few years. So within two,
[Guest]: three, four years, I think all that got over. And so while that may have been the early
[Guest]: urge and there was definitely an urge to make the world better and a mix of things, right?
[Guest]: But you know, as someone who has come from, say, the periphery of the country, you do
[Guest]: feel that voices in the periphery are not heard. So you do want to make those voices
[Guest]: a bit more audible. Similarly, you do feel that as an outsider, kind of outsider to the
[Guest]: mainstream, you can say stories that others are not able to. Then you also feel that when
[Guest]: you go out there, when you report, when you come back to write, because of your training,
[Guest]: because of the amount of time you have thought about these questions, the amount of time
[Guest]: you have studied, not just in formal courses and so on, but generally, you will be able
[Guest]: to offer a more comprehensive and coherent narrative compared to someone who hasn't.
[Guest]: And therefore, in some ways, you will be able to teach others to do better. Like I remember
[Guest]: people used to joke about me when I first joined Mint, that the reason Ramit has come
[Guest]: from IJDR to Mint, they used to make fun of that even then, that why did he come here,
[Guest]: was because his primary aim is to teach economics to journalists. So they used to make jokes
[Guest]: about that, and maybe there was some element of truth. But over a period of time, all that
[Guest]: dissolved. And, you know, in fact, one of my colleagues recently asked me this, exactly
[Guest]: the same question, because I'm now taking a break, I've quit what was a very nice and
[Guest]: fulfilling sort of job, that why don't you, and I'm still in writing. So the point was,
[Guest]: why still continue? You've already done a lot, and you can easily do something else.
[Guest]: And that's true. So there are two parts to it. One is the original choice I made, right?
[Guest]: I walked out of the placements from IJDR, knowing that I would always get a salary which
[Guest]: would be lower than any of my peers would be getting. So that gap would never be bridged.
[Guest]: And that was a very much conscious choice. And this was a life I wanted. I also had the
[Guest]: counterfactual of life as a corporate worker for two months at Citi, in its analytics division,
[Guest]: and I hated it. So it was not that I was living some, I was unaware of what the other life
[Guest]: would be, and so would be tempted by it. I think I did that precisely because of that,
[Guest]: so that I did not have any temptation later on. I knew journalism was hard. I had no illusions
[Guest]: about that part, at least. And the second part of it is that the way I think of it,
[Guest]: I think it was Akar Patel or someone who said that, you know, journalism is a craft. It
[Guest]: is not a skill in that sense. And I agree with that. So if I think of myself as a carpenter,
[Guest]: for instance, so initially I was making very rough chairs, and I was making different kind
[Guest]: of chairs, and for different people, different purposes. Over a period of time, I started
[Guest]: making more smoother chairs. And then I started making chairs which were unique, and where
[Guest]: I could bring in different kind of skills to produce a certain kind of chair, and which
[Guest]: was not there in the market. So that I felt is a value. And this process has taken me
[Guest]: long years, you know, it was only after eight, nine years, that I felt that, okay, fine,
[Guest]: I have understood a bit about, you know, how to make a mark as a writer, as a journalist.
[Guest]: I did get Ramnath Goenka fairly early on. That was never sort of a mark where I felt
[Guest]: that okay, I have arrived or I have this thing, nor was it any particular story. It was just,
[Guest]: you know, reading my own stuff, you know. So for instance, when I go back and read some
[Guest]: of my older stories, I feel why did I write this, you know. So that I think, if I'm not
[Guest]: very much mistaken, I won't say about some of my recent stories, for instance. So I'm
[Guest]: more satisfied with them. So it is that same way the carpenter is satisfied with the work
[Guest]: and therefore wants to go on because he feels that he has acquired some level of mastery.
[Guest]: I'm not saying I'm a master yet, but some level of mastery over that craft. It is the
[Guest]: same reason. Now, one could well argue that this is something like a sunk cost fallacy
[Guest]: and it might be true, but a sunk cost fallacy is known only post facto. So it is only later
[Guest]: that I will get to know. Right now I have the freedom, I have the privilege to do this
[Guest]: and you know, there are people who are happy to give me freelance work and I can continue
[Guest]: writing, even if I'm not associated full time with any organization. So I feel I should
[Guest]: make use of this privilege, continue to write till I can and then see what life has in store
[Amit Varma]: for me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I know. I don't think it's a sunk cost fallacy and I love the metaphor of the carpenter
[Amit Varma]: and the chair, you know, and it's something I'm going to use with my writing students
[Amit Varma]: because I keep telling them about how iteration leads to excellence. And one of my points
[Amit Varma]: is that whenever you start doing something, you suck at it, right? I start writing, I'll
[Amit Varma]: suck at it. I start podcasting, I suck at it. Carpenter starts, makes his first chair,
[Amit Varma]: he sucks at it. How do you get better? You do it again and again, you sharpen the craft.
[Amit Varma]: And then if things work out, you find that unique voice as it were, where you can make
[Amit Varma]: sort of the perfect kind of chair. And that's what happens to writers. I see that in my
[Amit Varma]: own podcasting journey where you know, my early episodes are clumsy chairs. And now
[Amit Varma]: I think I've got a particular style and a particular voice. So I'm intrigued in double
[Amit Varma]: clicking on what is the kind of chair that is true to you? What is that authentic chair
[Amit Varma]: that you're making? And obviously, you know, it's a metaphor. So just in terms of the kind
[Amit Varma]: of stories you do, the kind of writings you do, like where does that individuality, that
[Amit Varma]: authenticity come in? Like another key thing I tell all my writing students is that forget
[Amit Varma]: everything else. The one thing you cannot compromise on is being authentic to yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Don't try to second guess what the reader might want or where there is a hole in the
[Amit Varma]: market, just be authentic to yourself. And even in your work, like from the outside to
[Amit Varma]: many people, journalism may seem everything is same, same people are going out and reporting
[Amit Varma]: stories and it's just a matter of efficiency. But it's not that right. You have a particular
[Amit Varma]: way of looking at the world, you have particular interests and passions and areas you want
[Amit Varma]: to dive into, like you dived into nutrition, for example. And when all of this comes together,
[Amit Varma]: there is something that you can look at and say, Oh, this is this is a Pramit Bhattacharya
[Amit Varma]: story, or this is a Rukmini story, or you know, all these unique voices are sort of
[Amit Varma]: developing. So how would you sort of define your chair as it were, or tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: I can't ask you to define a chair, but tell me a little bit more about it.
[Guest]: I don't know how to answer that. But the way I see it, I see it as a sort of few sets of
[Guest]: comparative advantage that I have. One is, unlike many other data journalists, I started
[Guest]: out as a sort of field reporter, did beat reporting, then long form writing. And even
[Guest]: before that, I had a sort of very diverse sort of experiences and because of my political
[Guest]: student activism and so on, which are not easily replicable. So that is one, the background
[Guest]: and everything. The second part is, of course, my economics training. Not a lot of people
[Guest]: with that kind of training tend to get into journalism. And even if they were to, they
[Guest]: may not be willing to sacrifice for so many years to wait for the reward. So, and I don't
[Guest]: blame them. So I'm just saying, stating it as a fact. So that means that there are very
[Guest]: few people who understand that subject topic in depth and then are able to come up with
[Guest]: a sort of informed view and a narrative around it. And the final thing, as I said, because
[Guest]: of my life experiences, the only ism I have been left with is skepticism. And it is not
[Guest]: very useful in any other profession. But in journalism it is. It makes a huge difference
[Guest]: to your work. If I were to, you know, be a propagandist for a particular school of thought
[Guest]: or for a particular agenda or a particular, there's nothing wrong in it. I mean, many
[Guest]: journalists are, whether they admit it or not. And it's fine. They can still do very
[Guest]: good work. Can even do good data work, building, you know, your arguments brick by brick using
[Guest]: numbers rather than mere words. You can combine the two and build powerful arguments. And
[Guest]: I don't have temptations for doing that. And it is true that many people will prefer that
[Guest]: kind of a loaded narrative, which is already pre-decided. I don't have fascination for
[Guest]: that. While it is true that the audience for that may not be great, I have always engaged
[Guest]: with that kind of an audience, which values that kind of independent work. So in my own
[Guest]: growth, it is these people who have played a role, not the trolls or not the, you know,
[Guest]: partisans. So it's a combination of all this that comes into my writing. The final thing
[Guest]: is the curiosity to dig deeper and also the ability to pursue that depth and then finally
[Guest]: break it down by simplifying, but not oversimplifying. So that is a very delicate balance. And I
[Guest]: can't give a sort of rule or a, you know, database, this thing on what it is. But I
[Guest]: think that is very important. And I think that I would attribute to my training in IGADL
[Guest]: because, you know, when you have to write this long term papers, you didn't work hard.
[Guest]: And in the last three, four days, you had to go through 50, 60 research papers to come
[Guest]: up with one term paper. That very experience of digesting all that information and in technical
[Guest]: language, turgid prose, and then coming up with something that the professor can understand.
[Guest]: Of course, the professor can still understand turgid prose, but I also paid attention to
[Guest]: my writing and some professors commented also on that. So the final thing is that, that
[Guest]: experience teaches you. So what you do in journalism then becomes child's play, basically
[Guest]: because you deal with a lesser sort of, less technically challenging sort of set of circumstances.
[Guest]: And that gives you the confidence that you can crack it. Even if it is a complicated
[Guest]: economic subject, you spend some time on it, you'll be able to crack it. If necessary,
[Guest]: you can take the help of someone you know. And that is the final thing that over the
[Guest]: years I've spoken to experts across various fields. I've always had very diverse interests.
[Guest]: So there's some nutrition expert who still remembers me. There's a market guy who at
[Guest]: that time was not known, but today is widely respected and so on, who will still answer
[Guest]: my call because I spoke to him at a time when no one knew him. So there are these kinds
[Guest]: spread across various fields and disconnected fields. And I can bring all of that also into
[Guest]: my work. So it's a combination of several things. In fact, you know, to sum it up, I
[Guest]: would, if possible, I'll dig out the link and send it to you. It's an interview by Elena
[Guest]: Ferrante, of Elena Ferrante rather, the author of the Neapolitan novels, which my wife had
[Guest]: read several years ago and was very impressed by. Constantly urged me to read, which till
[Guest]: I left my pen job, I didn't have the time to read. Now I finished it, all the four parts.
[Guest]: And I was just reading about her. So I went through one interview with her, where she
[Guest]: says that, you know, this writing, this process is like weaving. And you basically learn that
[Guest]: you have to weave different threads in. You're not even aware of the existence of the other
[Guest]: threads when you start. It is only when you start doing it that you know that this thread
[Guest]: is missing, the other thread is missing. And then you bring all this together and your
[Guest]: work becomes better. So I quite relate to that. I don't think I've seen all the threads
[Guest]: yet, but I have a fair idea now. And I also know what threads are missing, but I know
[Guest]: how to sort of address them or sort of fill them in. I'm not completely new to this. And
[Guest]: so, which is why I would like to sort of pursue this a bit more, become a bit more better.
[Amit Varma]: That's a beautiful metaphor of the threads and weaving. And I'm reminded of this quote
[Amit Varma]: by Joan Didion, where she said, I don't know what I think until I write it down, a stop
[Amit Varma]: quote, which is so lovely. And that's another thing I kind of tell my writing students that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, sometimes people will get paralyzed because they'll start writing something and
[Amit Varma]: one there is the anxiety and the bigness of the task and all of that. But two also, sometimes
[Amit Varma]: they will feel that they don't know exactly where it's going. So they don't write at all.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is that sometimes writing is a process of discovering your material. Sometimes
[Amit Varma]: you can find the gaps in your own knowledge and know what else you need to do. Sometimes
[Amit Varma]: it clarifies your thinking about something, especially if you force yourself to write
[Amit Varma]: in clear language, you have to force yourself to think clearly, and it really helps. And
[Amit Varma]: there's another quote by the novelist E.L. Doctorow, where he said that even if you can
[Amit Varma]: see only the light of your headlights, you can make the whole journey that way, which
[Amit Varma]: is kind of like driving in the Delhi fog in winter, I guess. But which is another way
[Amit Varma]: that you can sort of approach writing, you don't need to know necessarily everything
[Amit Varma]: that you're writing about, you need to start, you can go by the headlights. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: for a lot of fiction, certainly, I think it's also a process of self discovery. So what
[Amit Varma]: I want to do now after a quick commercial break, which we shall take now, after a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break, I want to talk about writing to you, because that is also a related craft
[Amit Varma]: to journalism and data and all of that. Fascinating to know how you're thinking on that evolved
[Amit Varma]: over time. But let's take a quick commercial break first.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009, and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day, and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com,
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast, and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox, you don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Pramit Bhattacharya, who, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in the break, when I said we'll talk about writing after this was saying I don't
[Amit Varma]: think I'm a great writer. But you know, anyone who says I don't think I'm a great writer,
[Amit Varma]: I don't take that seriously had somebody said to me that listen, I will tell you everything
[Amit Varma]: about the craft, I would have been skeptical, as which is also the default ism of my new
[Amit Varma]: friend Pramit. So skepticism always a good thing. But I want to talk about writing because
[Amit Varma]: one of the things that I've noticed while you've been talking about your journey in
[Amit Varma]: journalism is the importance of realizing that there is a reader at the end of it and
[Amit Varma]: the reader matters. Like too often what happens is when we write, we imagine the act of writing
[Amit Varma]: is the act of transferring thoughts from our head onto our laptop. And that's it, the writing
[Amit Varma]: is done. But especially for journalistic writing, that is not the process, your writing only
[Amit Varma]: becomes meaningful and comes alive and it has an intended effect on the intended reader.
[Amit Varma]: And in the case of journalism, where you manage to convey the story that you're saying, and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one of the things I tell my writer, in fact, for those who want to write op-eds,
[Amit Varma]: I give them what I call the Naniji test, which is that every time you write an op-ed, show
[Amit Varma]: it to your Naniji or to a 16 year old sibling. And if they don't read the full thing, it's
[Amit Varma]: your fault. It's not their fault. The idea being not something specific to do with Nanijis
[Amit Varma]: or siblings, but just any intelligent layperson should be able to understand it. And that's
[Amit Varma]: exactly what you said when speaking both about writing and about the kind of data that you
[Amit Varma]: use when you said that, you know, we are not going to use extremely complex terms and just
[Amit Varma]: keep it in standard level. So tell me a little bit about how your approach towards writing
[Amit Varma]: evolved. Because when I look at my own journey, what I see in myself as a young person is
[Amit Varma]: that I was a bad writer as all new beginning writers are, but my judgment was also bad.
[Amit Varma]: You know, my judgment and ability were equally bad. So I didn't know I was a bad writer.
[Amit Varma]: I thought I'm damn good. And I persevered and basically I faked it till I made it. You
[Amit Varma]: know, fake it till you make it in the present tense sounds much better. Faked it till I
[Amit Varma]: made it sounds bad. So what was that process for you like, like at what point I imagine
[Amit Varma]: early on in your journalism, you have to get mindful about your writing, you have to look
[Amit Varma]: at the craft, consider the craft. Tell me a little bit about that process of values
[Amit Varma]: that you then had to imbibe. And also, were there any writing models for you people you
[Amit Varma]: could look at and say that, wow, this person does it really well. I want to be like her.
[Guest]: Yeah, so it's a combination of all that. And in fact, before journalism, I before I entered
[Guest]: the newsroom, I thought I was a great writer. So, and that was partly because, you know,
[Guest]: in Cotton College, then during IJDR, I edited the newsletter, everyone said, wow, what writing
[Guest]: and so on. I realized that was only because the rest was so poor. When I wrote my first
[Guest]: copy after joining Mint, Ravi, with whom I started the data, he was my mentor. So it's
[Guest]: only later that we started it together and so on. So Ravi was the senior market writer.
[Guest]: And he gave me some IPOs, DRHP and asked me to write something. So I think I must have
[Guest]: rewritten that first copy six times. Before Ravi said that, okay, fine, I can send it
[Guest]: for subbing. So, but in the second copy, I had to read it only once. And from then on,
[Guest]: it was just one round of rewriting and so on. And after two, three months, there wasn't
[Guest]: much rewriting. So Ravi claims that I was a reasonably fast learner. I think there is
[Guest]: only half truth in that, because the thing is, Ravi wanted to move out of market reporting.
[Guest]: So he had to convince the bosses that there was going to be a replacement in the next
[Guest]: few months. And so I was still, I think, half done by the time he left. But then I was on
[Guest]: my own and I had to face, you know, the resident editor or the deputy, whatever, managing editor,
[Guest]: Tamal, on my own. And that was a rung above. And, you know, he was the overall bureau chief.
[Guest]: So you couldn't just push whatever you wanted. So I had to be very careful on my own. Sometimes
[Guest]: I would ask Ravi to still take a look at what I had written. And then for front page stories,
[Guest]: Niranjan would take a look and who would have a completely different set of questions and
[Guest]: so on. And whenever he picked it, I mean, anyone, not just me, even a very senior writer
[Guest]: would really be afraid, you know, what is he going to ask? It was that kind of...
[Guest]: Can you give me an example? Can you remember something? Yeah, so this is, I don't think
[Guest]: I should name that person. A very senior journalist now, a very senior editor in another newspaper,
[Guest]: Economic Times, I think I can name the newspaper, who was at Mint at that point. And he and
[Guest]: Ravi had written some piece and they put it on the system. We had a system called IDOS,
[Guest]: the content management system, and where you can see who is editing and all the records
[Guest]: are left. So it was a very transparent system also. So you can see the changes, you can
[Guest]: review it. And each writer can see what each, whether the sub-editor or the... So each copy
[Guest]: also went through three rounds of checks before it was published. So Mint had this system.
[Guest]: And the third check could often be either the managing editor or the editor himself.
[Guest]: So Niranjan or Sukumar. And whenever either of these two picked up, there was complete
[Guest]: chaos in the newsroom. When Sukumar, people used to shout, Oh God, Sukumar has picked
[Guest]: up. When Niranjan, they couldn't shout because he was sitting there. I remember Niranjan,
[Guest]: the moment Niranjan picked up the copy, that person came up to Ravi and said that, Ravi,
[Guest]: let's go down. So Ravi said, Niranjan has picked up. He showed. Then both of them vanished.
[Guest]: And Niranjan wanted to, had a query or he couldn't find them for, you know, like half
[Guest]: an hour or something. And then he said, what happened? He said, no, no, we just fled, seeing
[Guest]: that we knew there were problems in the copy. So tell us now what are the problems. But
[Guest]: the thing is, Niranjan would never shout or, you know, make you feel bad. He would just
[Guest]: raise questions in a very pointed manner. That's all. And he would sometimes kill copies.
[Guest]: That was a real fear that ultimately it would not go. And I think in a couple of instances,
[Guest]: he has killed my copies also. One or two copies. And they deserve to be killed. So...
[Guest]: But he tell you why? He will explain why. And in one case, I actually
[Guest]: reworked it and then he cleared it also. So it was very, very rational sort of dialogue.
[Guest]: It was not this thing. I sort of, I benefited from the mentorship and the guidance and the
[Guest]: feedback, sometimes very critical feedback from all of them. And one feedback I consistently
[Guest]: got in my early months was that I had an academic overhang, which was understandable because
[Guest]: I had come from a research institute and finished my master's and come. So I worked hard to
[Guest]: sort of get over it. I don't think I managed it till many years later when I fully realized.
[Guest]: But one thing that always struck me was, suppose I came back from a field, from somewhere else,
[Guest]: wrote a report and so on, submitted to Niranjan. Niranjan would take his time in sort of getting
[Guest]: back on it. But then he would come up with very specific questions or comments that this
[Guest]: part is problematic or this part. It was not a vague thing that you don't know how to write
[Guest]: or this thing. So he would always tell me you're a decent writer. But sometimes in some
[Guest]: places it's sloppy. So I think it was easier to improve with that kind of specific, precise
[Guest]: feedback and which I have tried to emulate in my own work as an editor. I usually don't
[Guest]: say that the entire copy is rubbish. Sometimes I do when I, when the entire premise is wrong.
[Guest]: But then I say that the premise is wrong and I mean, this is not a story and that copy
[Guest]: is not actually written. Because in plain facts, you actually have to submit a pitch
[Guest]: with what you're going to do, what are your methods and so on. Only after that is approved,
[Guest]: can you start reporting and then writing. So it's a multi-step process. So at the pitch
[Guest]: stage itself, I kill ideas because I don't want to waste the reporter's time also. And
[Guest]: usually data stories take a fair amount of time. So a fair amount of data work goes in,
[Guest]: many hours of work goes in after I approve the pitch. So from a practical point of view
[Guest]: also it makes sense. So those kind of feedback I think helps improve one's writing. And the
[Guest]: final thing is, initially, you know, you have this people whom everyone acknowledges as
[Guest]: very good writers like Niranjan, Manas Chakravorty. And stuff they wrote would make people sit
[Guest]: up and you go for a meeting next day, someone would talk about it and you know it has made
[Guest]: an impact, you know, people are talking about it. So naturally you want to emulate, right?
[Guest]: And instead of emulating, you end up imitating. So initially, for a while, I used to imitate
[Guest]: how Niranjan approached. Then I used to imitate how Manasa approached. And it took me a while
[Amit Varma]: to realize that this is not working. And they both have their own kind of chairs, isn't
[Guest]: it? You can't make those chairs again. Yes, exactly. So then I began talking to them about
[Guest]: what it is, how they approached it, you know, what is it that they read before they started
[Guest]: writing, what are the changes they made after they had decided the topic and the flow, whether
[Guest]: there were any last minute changes. So that writing, and I didn't do it in a very sort
[Guest]: of note-taking kind of a way. It was just over coffee or this thing. Generally I said
[Guest]: that I like this and then they will tell the story. You know, it was just exchanging. It
[Guest]: felt like we were just gossiping about writing. It never felt, and I also didn't consciously
[Guest]: sort of, this thing, I looked up to them, of course, and I wanted to learn from them.
[Guest]: But it happened very casually, or at least they made me feel that, you know, we are talking
[Guest]: as equals. So I think the credit lies with them, nothing to do with me. Those conversations
[Guest]: helped a lot. If in my early years, I didn't have those conversations, I don't think I
[Guest]: could have survived till now. So, but despite all that, it is, much of it is also self sort
[Guest]: of this thing. You go back and look at some of your old copies and you go, yeah, and you
[Guest]: realize that, you know, some bad habits you have left. Sometimes while you're reading
[Guest]: your own work, even recent work, you feel that, no, this could have been, you could
[Guest]: have done better. And then you frame a rule internally in your mind that next time you
[Guest]: should avoid this. So it's a mixture of, I think, all of this, but this early environment
[Guest]: and what kind of feedback you get, how precise that feedback is, makes a huge amount of difference.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, earlier you spoke about how you, you became a better manager when you
[Amit Varma]: started thinking of managing as a skill. Now, when you became an editor, and you were, you
[Amit Varma]: know, guiding other journalists and approving copy or suggesting changes, did that make
[Amit Varma]: you a better writer? Because what I have found is that the act of like, I've been teaching
[Amit Varma]: an online writing course for a few months now. And I feel that I'm just looking at my
[Amit Varma]: own writing differently now, because it's just so much sharper. And I keep telling my
[Amit Varma]: students that the main thing is mindfulness, that you might have a different view of a
[Amit Varma]: particular piece of copy than I do. And that is fine. But the important thing is that you're
[Amit Varma]: mindful of all the choices you make, and you know why you're making them. And similarly,
[Amit Varma]: I feel that that's made me more mindful of my own copy, why am I doing the things I do?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, or just reading the pieces to give feedback, I kind of realized that that
[Amit Varma]: kind of gaze helps me with my own work also. So has that been the case with you? Like,
[Amit Varma]: do you feel that that added an extra layer of awareness to your writing?
[Guest]: Yes, certainly. So that is one part of it, I became more mindful. And I started then
[Guest]: avoiding the same things that I asked, because one has to practice what one preaches. But
[Guest]: even beyond that, around that time, because I became an editor, and of course, Niranjan
[Guest]: wanted me to sort of make my own judgments and choices. So very often, he would leave
[Guest]: it to me to shape the final this thing, and he would take a look much later, or after
[Guest]: it had been published, he would give me feedback. So it was also a sense of responsibility that
[Guest]: the buck now stops with me, and especially after Niranjan left. So that I think was a
[Guest]: huge sort of this thing that there is no one now in the system, I still sometimes request
[Guest]: him to take a look at my work, and he does. But that that sort of forces you to be much
[Guest]: more careful, both in your choice of words and the approach you take when you write something.
[Guest]: So that definitely, so mindfulness and the sense of responsibility both sort of shaped
[Guest]: my later period writing definitely. I think it made me more precise or more sort of made
[Guest]: what the messages I wanted to convey, I think I was able to do it with a greater amount
[Amit Varma]: of precision compared to earlier. So let's talk about data now. Like I've done an episode
[Amit Varma]: with Dinyar Patel on Dada Bhai Navroji. And Dada Bhai Navroji, of course, was in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: a pioneer, I don't know if he was the first, but he was certainly a pioneer in terms of
[Amit Varma]: using data to figure out what is the state of the economy. And he did it with a political
[Amit Varma]: purpose with a purpose being to sort of push back against British claims of how, how the
[Guest]: governance was. He created the first poverty land in India, so to speak. Yeah. And you've
[Amit Varma]: pointed out that, you know, TN Srinivasan coined that, but Dada Bhai Navroji essentially
[Amit Varma]: came up with that. And that's just like pioneering work. So it's, it's, you know, using data
[Amit Varma]: not in a dry way, but number one, to make a political point to counter a false narrative.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you can't argue against data. And two, to also sort of have more clarity
[Amit Varma]: on the state of the world, what it is actually like. Tell me a little bit about sort of the
[Amit Varma]: evolution of data science in India and its relationship with governance, because it's
[Amit Varma]: very interesting. And one of the things I didn't realize that, like I was listening
[Amit Varma]: to your interview by Milan Vaishnav on Grand Tamasha, where you spoke a bit about it, where
[Amit Varma]: I was sort of startled by how India, in a sense, actually led the rest of the world
[Amit Varma]: on certain things, which I found so fascinating. And so tell me a little bit more about this
[Amit Varma]: history of data science, as it were, as it had gone through the years.
[Guest]: Yeah, I would rather use the term statistics. That's what I prefer. It is true. I mean,
[Guest]: India was definitely one of the early pioneers. The Indian Statistical Institute was set up
[Guest]: much before statistics departments were set up in US universities. And in fact, many American
[Guest]: universities hired graduates from ISI to set up those programs in the US. So we had a lead
[Guest]: over any other developing country by far, and we had a lead over most developed countries.
[Guest]: There were only two countries which I would say were more advanced in statistics than
[Guest]: India. One was the UK, where much of the early work on probability sampling and so on occurred.
[Guest]: And the other was USSR. And partly because of Soviet planning and so on, they had to
[Guest]: rely a lot on statistics. And both this English and Russian experiences shaped statistical
[Guest]: thinking globally, including in India. But India had its own sort of experiments and
[Guest]: surveys and so on. And you're right, Dada Banerjee, that his work gave the sort of initial
[Guest]: impetus to many nationalists to start looking at the economic questions, the kind of exploitation
[Guest]: that had happened and to what extent it had happened. And a lot of it in the early work
[Guest]: were based on very provisional, preliminary, rough data. Much of it was to advance the
[Guest]: nationalist line of argument without the rigor that was really required. And the first to
[Guest]: sort of make a difference and to produce really rigorous estimates of India's national income
[Guest]: as such was V. K. R. V. Rao. This was in 1931, if I'm not mistaken. I'm slightly
[Guest]: bad with days. So unless I've read the paper yesterday, I may not be able to sort of exactly.
[Guest]: But early 1930s, let's say. And so that was one effort. The other side parallelly was
[Guest]: this young physicist called Prasanta Chandra Mohalanobis from a very aristocratic family
[Guest]: in Bengal, a Brahmo family, very close to Rabindranath Tagore and that social milieu,
[Guest]: who suddenly decides in the middle of his physics education that he has to do statistics.
[Guest]: And in fact, he comes back and joins the physics department and sets up a small unit. That
[Guest]: is the Indian Statistic Institute. That's where it started. If I'm not mistaken, this
[Guest]: is also in the late 20s, late 1920s. Very late, it would be early 1930s. But if I'm
[Guest]: not mistaken, it is late 1920s. And the first sort of surveys are initiated there. And this
[Guest]: is remarkable because it is only in the 1920s that probability sampling has first been discovered.
[Guest]: So within few years, this has travelled to India. This is remarkable speed at which India
[Guest]: picked this up, thanks to Mohalanobis. And also thanks to another economist in Gokhale,
[Guest]: D. R. Gadgil, who had also started doing some surveys of his own. And among this, Mohalanobis
[Guest]: had the widest range of connections and intersections, both with the global sort of statistical establishment,
[Guest]: including the Royal Statistical Society and other statisticians at UK and USSR. And also
[Guest]: with India's own political leadership and administrators in the Reserve Bank of India
[Guest]: and so on. And Mohalanobis' contribution to sampling theory were definitely, he made significant
[Guest]: contributions, including, for instance, this idea that you should do a pilot survey before
[Guest]: doing a full-scale survey. That was in ISI. No other institute did it. And then it became,
[Guest]: it has become now a standard everywhere. Before you do a full-scale survey, you do it. So
[Guest]: that originated in India. So that was, there were other such contributions. But the bigger
[Guest]: thing was to do this household level surveys at a large scale. That was done for the first
[Guest]: time in India and Mohalanobis was the pioneer. And on the one hand, he convinced the nationalist
[Guest]: leadership in the Congress, thanks to people like Deshmukh, who introduced him to Nehru
[Guest]: and others. C. D. Deshmukh was in RBI at that time, was the RBI governor, later became finance
[Guest]: minister. And Deshmukh convinced Nehru that basically this man is really talented and
[Guest]: you need to tap him. And Nehru understood that without filling these data gaps, we couldn't
[Guest]: plan properly. So it was also, we had already sort of decided that we would take the planned
[Guest]: approach. The political leadership had decided. The industrial lobby in Bombay had also backed
[Guest]: that plan, 1944 famous Bombay plan. So the entire elite class was agreed on planning
[Guest]: and you cannot have planning without data. So that was the big impetus that drove much
[Guest]: of these efforts. But beyond that, Mohalanobis was also interested in influencing the trajectory
[Guest]: of data collection and statistics globally. So when the first United Nations Commission
[Guest]: on Statistics meeting took place in New York in 1946, Mohalanobis suggested that we need
[Guest]: a proper standardized manual for conducting surveys. Otherwise, the results will not be
[Guest]: comparable across the world. And it was accepted and he was asked to chair that subcommittee
[Guest]: on sampling, which produced that first set of manuals that were used globally by all
[Guest]: countries. So he practically wrote the handbook of surveys, basically, you know. And later
[Guest]: on when ISI was got government recognition, it scaled up. Most developing countries would
[Guest]: send their people's statisticians, official statisticians to India to learn statistics
[Guest]: and so on. In fact, the vice premier of China in 1956 had come to ISI because China was
[Guest]: very backward in statistics. Their line of communism had apparently rejected a lot of
[Guest]: the Marxist approach, including probability sampling, which was very strange. But they
[Guest]: realized their mistake and they were missing out on something. And he came to ISI and the
[Guest]: meeting ran much longer and his entire schedule got disrupted because of that. And he insisted
[Guest]: on knowing exactly what it is that Mohalanobis did, his team did. And he insisted that there
[Guest]: would be a Chinese delegation which he would send and Mohalanobis should entertain and
[Guest]: educate them before sending them back. So there was this global interest in what India
[Guest]: was doing. India was leading the charge. And there were a whole new raft of innovations,
[Guest]: you know, setting up this National Sample Survey, Central Statistical Organization,
[Guest]: Annual Survey of Industries, Agricultural Surveys, RBI started surveys on rural credit.
[Guest]: So across institutions and through interconnected individuals, Mohalanobis, VKRV Rao, Gadgil,
[Guest]: there was this whole nation building and statistics building sort of approach at the same time
[Guest]: that could inform the planning process and make India a stronger economy. So they may
[Guest]: have different approaches to statistics and so on, but all of them were agreed on the
[Guest]: final goal that you need better data, you need to fill the data gaps and hence you need
[Guest]: an independent sort of survey mechanism. And it was not an easy sort of process. In many
[Guest]: cases you needed to handle this large scale household surveys. You didn't know how to
[Guest]: handle it because you were doing it for the first time and there were no global examples.
[Guest]: India had to import second-hand IBM machines from the US and Mohalanobis somehow managed
[Guest]: it. A lot of people thought that Mohalanobis is too close to the USSR, you know, because
[Guest]: he was also the originator of the second plan which followed industrialization-led model
[Guest]: of economic development. But what is not known is that he had equal range of interactions
[Guest]: with scholars from all over the world and it was through American help that those IBM
[Guest]: machines came to ISI and helped in the tabulation of NSS data. Otherwise those results, those
[Guest]: survey would have been useless or it would have taken much longer for them to arrive
[Guest]: by which the timeliness of the data would have been lost. So Mohalanobis was quite agnostic
[Guest]: and whoever provided help he was ready to take and in fact there are now declassified
[Guest]: Soviet archival work which other historians have looked at where they say that KGB and
[Guest]: other Soviet agencies were actually suspecting that Mohalanobis had moved to the other side
[Guest]: or something of that kind. So he was viewed with some amount of skepticism
[Guest]: on both sides. But in a way what he was basically pursuing was national interest. That's my
[Guest]: reading and he helped generate this awe and respect for statistics and Indian statistics
[Guest]: globally. He helped establish his reputation and he also helped establish its acceptance
[Guest]: in India. He got the leading statisticians of the world to come and review the first
[Guest]: NSS reports and their conclusion was that there were many areas of improvement but they
[Guest]: said and this include people like Fisher who is considered the father, one of the fathers
[Guest]: of modern statistics and they said that as far as the sample surveys are concerned, the
[Guest]: world has much more to learn than to teach from India and this is what built up India's
[Guest]: official statistical reputation and even Angus Deaton, the recent Nobel Prize winner, he
[Guest]: says that where India and Mohalanobis led, the rest of the world followed.
[Guest]: So we often hark back to some ancient golden era where we had done this fantastic achievements
[Guest]: in mathematics and sciences. Some of it real, some of it imagined. There are real contributions
[Guest]: also. But we don't need to look that far back as well. Our achievements in statistical science,
[Guest]: in applied statistics is phenomenal yet we do not give it the kind of recognition it
[Guest]: deserves and this is particularly true now because there is an aversion to anything associated
[Guest]: with Nehru but this was also true earlier. It is not the case that this aspect of India's
[Guest]: intellectual contribution was highlighted in a significant manner by people outside
[Guest]: the statistical establishment. So people within that do know and do talk about it but otherwise
[Guest]: not so much. Indian economists take our data for granted or till recently have done and
[Guest]: that's about it. They too do not engage with the data systems to the extent that is
[Guest]: perhaps required and one reason why there has been a decay over the years, especially
[Guest]: in the post Mahalanobis era is partly because of that. The amount of external involvement,
[Guest]: the amount of involvement of independent academics who could review, who could assist, who could
[Guest]: engage with the official machinery and improve their work has steadily come down. It has
[Guest]: not happened in a day. There has been a long period of bureaucratization. NSS governing
[Guest]: councils used to be headed by academics and dominated by independent experts. Only one
[Guest]: or two bureaucrats would be there. This process got reversed. A lot of powers of the governing
[Guest]: council were taken over by the Ministry of Statistics which was earlier in the same ministry
[Guest]: as the planning committee, which handled planning commission. So a lot of these changes started
[Guest]: happening from the 80s onwards and then 91 liberalization unfortunately led to a cut
[Guest]: of funds for all departments including the statistical machinery and because of India's
[Guest]: liberalization and its globalization and standardization of data and all this became priority. IMF
[Guest]: came up with data standards based largely on the requirements of developed countries
[Guest]: and created a uniform set that every country had to follow including India and so the data
[Guest]: demands of certain kinds went up which may or may not have matched with India's interest
[Guest]: but which India had to follow because it was a signatory to that and in the early 90s India
[Guest]: was also getting IMF funds. So from the 50s when India was setting the standards for the
[Guest]: world and India was setting standards in the world based on its own experience as a developing
[Guest]: country as a third world country, the wheel turned full circle. Now we have come to a
[Guest]: stage where we just accept standards given by others. We no longer have leadership in
[Guest]: as far as official statistics is concerned. There are still many brilliant statisticians
[Guest]: in the country but their engagement also with the statistical establishment is far more
[Guest]: limited today than it was in the past and many people even from issues like the Indian
[Guest]: Statistical Institute who graduate and they do not get into the survey work or statistical
[Guest]: establishment work and so on because there are many other lucrative options including
[Guest]: in the private sector as well as abroad. So the influx of talent into the official statistical
[Guest]: system has also suffered and a combination of this has resulted in the fact that today
[Guest]: statisticians find it very difficult to defend their work which was not the case earlier
[Guest]: and hence it is much more easier to attack their work even when those people who are
[Guest]: attacking often do not know the basics of what they are talking about.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of observations around a couple of broad themes and the second one kind of
[Amit Varma]: leads to a question of sorts. My first observation is to tell my listeners and to remind myself
[Amit Varma]: that the level of statistics that we have today is actually really recent like you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out India's contribution, Mahalanobis's contribution but just to go a little back
[Amit Varma]: in history and I explored this in an episode on the GDP with Rajeshwari Sengupta but just
[Amit Varma]: looking at the GDP as one kind of interesting statistic that has come up. After the first
[Amit Varma]: world war, the winners met around the table with the loser Germany and they were deciding
[Amit Varma]: on what reparation should Germany pay and they had no way of knowing what Germany could
[Amit Varma]: actually afford to pay because there was no GDP, there was no measure of the economy.
[Amit Varma]: So they set a large number that proved to be too large and too large in what sense Germany
[Amit Varma]: had no way of paying that kind of money as reparations. So they ended up just printing
[Amit Varma]: money so wildly that there was hyperinflation and that hyperinflation you know had consequences
[Amit Varma]: on their economy and their society which indirectly led to the rise of Hitler and Nazism and even
[Amit Varma]: the second world war, the seen and the unseen going that deep and around 1920 Keynes wrote
[Amit Varma]: this book called the Economic Consequences of the Peace where he warned against this
[Amit Varma]: happening and some of the impetus for creating a measure like a GDP came out of that and
[Amit Varma]: then the great depression in America that we first need to measure this before we can
[Amit Varma]: talk about it and that's the importance of statistics and Simon Kuznets who is one of
[Amit Varma]: the pioneers at you know creating the GDP and getting that measure about however did
[Amit Varma]: protest to one aspect of the GDP as it was adopted which is that government spending
[Amit Varma]: was counted in the GDP and Kuznets' point was this that a government can therefore game
[Amit Varma]: the GDP by just digging ditches and filling them up it's all government spending it's
[Amit Varma]: kind of easy to game and therefore you game that statistic you can use it in the service
[Amit Varma]: of politics whatever politics you have now what I find also interesting about India and
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned the Soviet Union also being so advanced in statistics is that there was
[Amit Varma]: an ideology which I feel was flawed which is this whole central planning planned economy
[Amit Varma]: mindset but this flawed ideology is leading to the birth of a methodology and a practice
[Amit Varma]: that's actually incredibly useful like you know the Soviet Union one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: they did to push their kind of nationalism was the focus on chess where chess was taught
[Amit Varma]: in kindergartens in all schools and all of that and through their dominance of chess
[Amit Varma]: they wanted to send a message to the rest of the world about their intellectual superiority
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth so that's a good consequence of a bad way of thinking and in a sense when
[Amit Varma]: I look at all the sort of the pioneering work by Mahalonubis and all of that the work that
[Amit Varma]: comes it also seems to me that a lot of the statistics feel so necessary because the more
[Amit Varma]: you are in the planning mindset the more you need the statistics because you are like you
[Amit Varma]: know what Adam Smith would have called a man of system you know everything is a chessboard
[Amit Varma]: and you're trying to just get everything right and of course we know that economies and societies
[Amit Varma]: don't work like that and they were more complex but the good part of it is that you have these
[Amit Varma]: statistical systems coming up and that's great and you'd imagine that now that all of it
[Amit Varma]: has come up now that India has been a pioneer in so much of this that the same standards
[Amit Varma]: will continue and as you point out there's been a decline and I wonder at some level
[Amit Varma]: whether that decline in a sense is inevitable that your initial thrust towards building
[Amit Varma]: these systems and being a pioneer is you know whether it's an ideological impetus or whether
[Amit Varma]: it's a particular kind of passion or whether it is a great man theory of history Mahalonubis
[Amit Varma]: himself being a visionary and doing all of this eventually the inertia of the system
[Amit Varma]: takes over and the Indian state is an inertia machine and eventually that takes over and
[Amit Varma]: that leads to whatever declines have sort of happened so you know the rest was an observation
[Amit Varma]: but in the last part of what I just kind of said the inertia of the system and our statistical
[Amit Varma]: systems you know just kind of rumbling along without having people with drive and passion
[Amit Varma]: in them without having that sense of importance that bloody healthy statistics matter you
[Amit Varma]: know what is your sense of all of this because you are so much closer to it than I am yes
[Guest]: so that is certainly the case you do not have that kind of dedication and the sense of mission
[Guest]: that was there in the early work and it is true of many fields and many public policy
[Guest]: institutions so in that sense it is not an exception having said that the rank-and-file
[Guest]: statistician today in India statistical system is still very proud of that legacy and still
[Guest]: strives to protect it and even many senior statisticians are aware of that legacy and
[Guest]: try to their level best to achieve what it was set up for and it is thanks to them that
[Guest]: we get many of our stories when reports are attempted to be suppressed they fight back
[Guest]: and we should not take this for granted you know had these efforts not been there we would
[Guest]: have been in far worse condition not just because I wouldn't have got stories but you
[Guest]: would not have understood why certain things are happening why certain data sets are coming
[Guest]: and others are not coming out so so the point is that some of it is not that everything
[Guest]: is lost or nothing of it remains it is just that you don't have that kind of statistical
[Guest]: leadership so I would I would rather think that it is that gap which is missing and which
[Guest]: can be institutionalized so in fact if you look at the Rangarajan committee report they
[Guest]: said precisely this Mahalanobis was ordinary statistical advisor to the Nehru cabinet and
[Guest]: he was of course an extraordinary person whether you believe in the great man theory or not
[Guest]: now you you can't expect the same now in 2000 or whatever and the report was being written
[Guest]: so you institutionalize the system where a group of people will sort of oversee and will
[Guest]: stand a bit distant from the overall system there were attempts to create such a system
[Guest]: there is this legal luminary called Madhav Menon who chaired a committee to prepare such
[Guest]: a structure something like the election commission for statistics for instance which will ensure
[Guest]: fair play rules investigate if there are this thing whole departments to account if they
[Guest]: produce bad data and so on and the UK has such a system or has transitioned to such
[Guest]: a system now there are other countries which are moving almost all major economies have
[Guest]: a system of statistical audit India doesn't have one the only one that was attempted was
[Guest]: in 2011 for IIP and it was just an experimental sort of thing I don't think even that committee's
[Guest]: recommendations have been implemented so the idea is that yes a lot of things have declined
[Guest]: but there are a lot of things that still remain intact a lot of things can be improved maybe
[Guest]: not in the same way as it happened in the past maybe not using the same approach but
[Guest]: through different means different institutional mechanism and we should try them out similarly
[Guest]: regarding your point about planning and statistics yes it was a strength but in some ways it
[Guest]: was also weakness because the moment you started opening up your economy you dismantle the
[Guest]: license permit Raj producers of goods and services are no longer you know they don't
[Guest]: no longer feel it necessary to tell you how much exactly they're producing right you're
[Guest]: opening up the system earlier for every extra production you have to apply for every extra
[Guest]: unit you have to apply so the state had a where was it the commanding house of the economy
[Guest]: and it had the information set required for everything and you just need to call up someone
[Guest]: from another department you get the data if you're a statistician that thing vanished
[Guest]: and so the whole that came up was in the and the scale of the private sector in the economy
[Guest]: grew because the public sector shrunk so you had this growing private sector and you had
[Guest]: this opening up of this license permit Raj which is required economically but statistically
[Guest]: it is a disaster you lose all that information and since you didn't plan for it statistically
[Guest]: you are left with a gaping hole and which till this day we are struggling to fill in
[Guest]: fact the controversy of the latest GDP series 2014-15 series which continues to till this
[Guest]: day and which I'm sure Rajshree Sengupta must have touched upon she did her work on deflators
[Guest]: around that is precisely because of this it is the private corporate sector component
[Guest]: of the GDP that is that has proved to be most troublesome and most hard to pin down so it
[Guest]: is not just you know that one government came in and happened and so on it this is a long
[Guest]: story of you know various things coming together at a constellation of forces sort of determining
[Guest]: the trajectory of a statistical system and you finally arriving in this but as I said
[Guest]: this is some parts of it are broken but these are things that can be fixed so couple of
[Amit Varma]: provocative questions a two-part provocative question rather and part one is that if the
[Amit Varma]: planning mindset is no longer valid like we both agreed at liberalization you know got
[Amit Varma]: so many hundreds of millions of people out of poverty it was a great thing it was necessary
[Amit Varma]: but as you pointed out it affected the quality of our statistics so the first part of my
[Amit Varma]: question is that and this is meant to be purely provocative so people on Twitter please don't
[Amit Varma]: abuse me which always happens when I ask provocative questions but it's worth thinking about instead
[Amit Varma]: of the planning mindset is invalid which I believe it is then why are measures like the
[Amit Varma]: GDP even necessary you know let people live their lives and do whatever why does a government
[Amit Varma]: need to know for example like I understand in the interest of truth in the interest of
[Amit Varma]: all of us as citizens we want to know how's the economy doing but why is it even necessary
[Amit Varma]: and the second part of the question is whatever your answer to the first part the point is
[Amit Varma]: that I just feel that all statistics in a way are deeply inadequate in ways that the
[Amit Varma]: common public doesn't take into account because they're using it a shorthand which is fine
[Amit Varma]: you use it a shorthand because what else do you do but the GDP for example by sitting
[Amit Varma]: together and having this conversation like even if I wasn't recording it and even if
[Amit Varma]: this wasn't going out as a podcast I think both of us would agree that if we have a three
[Amit Varma]: hour conversation with each other both of us benefited it's a positive some game the
[Amit Varma]: value in both our lives went up that's not measured by GDP GDP would not measure for
[Amit Varma]: example the unpaid labor that women do everywhere GDP doesn't measure so many things you know
[Amit Varma]: GDP can measure that I bought a computer today and I had bought a computer seven years ago
[Amit Varma]: but it cannot possibly measured how the computer today it gives me so much more productivity
[Amit Varma]: and power than a computer seven years ago would have I don't mean to kind of focus on
[Amit Varma]: the GDP in particular and make it like a whipping boy for this hypothetical question and we'll
[Amit Varma]: discuss the importance of getting good data and understanding the world better right after
[Amit Varma]: this but just in terms of I see a lot of narratives constructed around this data that oh the GDP
[Amit Varma]: went up by so much or went down by this much or oh the formal sector has grown by so much
[Amit Varma]: or you know and you did a you know great piece about how that isn't isn't necessarily the
[Amit Varma]: case and my friend Mohit Satyanand had that in his latest newsletter which came out today
[Amit Varma]: and the data there is incredibly important but what would be your response to these questions
[Guest]: these are rather difficult questions and I'll try and answer them as best I can I mean they're
[Guest]: not the perfect answers perhaps so on the first thing about planning and if it if you
[Guest]: don't need planning then do we need data at all maybe the answer is probably no but then
[Guest]: is that a practical thing you know I've always believed in practical things and even if there
[Guest]: is some theoretical argument it has to keep in mind what the reality of the world is the
[Guest]: reality of the world is there's no country that does not practice planning whether they
[Guest]: call it planning or not right even a lot of the American programs all their funding abroad
[Guest]: their aid agencies even defense planning for instance strategic planning is necessary I
[Guest]: mean today you have a threat like China which in this particular moment may not come all
[Guest]: the way down to Tezpur my hometown as they did in 1962 but it is definitely a threat
[Guest]: and especially for that part of the country for Arunachal Pradesh and so on and the answer
[Guest]: to that threat may not lie in Arunachal it may lie somewhere else it may lie in South
[Guest]: China Sea it may lie in commerce it may lie in some other kind of but the state has to
[Guest]: plan right this is and this is something even Adam Smith would say that you know the first
[Guest]: duty of the sovereign yeah and continuing with Smith he would also say that the state
[Guest]: needs to take care of the poor when a pandemic happens you need to step in and so on so all
[Guest]: of these things are there even in the work of classical liberal sort of economists although
[Guest]: they none of them came up with this GDP concept as you said in 1930 so it's not that old nonetheless
[Guest]: the world had become the economy had become much more complex so while you were measuring
[Guest]: all this coal production power production etc separately there was no single metric
[Guest]: or no uniform metric so despite planning do you need that kind of a single metric or do
[Guest]: you need a dashboard of measures which captures the reality in a more richer form is I think
[Guest]: a more interesting and more practical question in that sense and which I have often thought
[Guest]: about and at the moment I don't have a yes or no answer I think at the moment I would
[Guest]: want to have both kind of measures and I would want policymakers to pay importance to both
[Guest]: these things because for some things like figuring out whether your public debt is too
[Guest]: high or not you cannot rely on a dashboard various others 20 other metrics to figure
[Guest]: you need one single metric with which you will normalize so this is just a mathematical
[Guest]: necessity that is one be a sort of common sort of measuring rod with which you can measure
[Guest]: economies with which you can measure the overall economic progress of the country will always
[Guest]: be required so if the government doesn't produce GDP there will be many other people in the
[Guest]: private market will produce alternate estimates and it will be they may not be there may be
[Guest]: even worse than what we have in the form of GDP so to some extent it is a bit of a inevitable
[Guest]: sort of this thing that everyone relies on GDP yes how you compute the GDP and how to
[Guest]: make it better that is definitely a question worth asking at the same time can you supplement
[Guest]: the GDP with a broader dashboard of measures is something that a lot of people have thought
[Guest]: about and a lot of people have suggested alternatives or metrics that which should be used GDP itself
[Guest]: is undergoing sort of revision and I had written about this how climate change has forced this
[Guest]: transition a bit faster than was earlier planned by bringing in natural resource accounting
[Guest]: that you just don't look at the flows of goods and services you look at the stock of different
[Guest]: kinds of capital including human capital natural capital and so on so that you can measure
[Guest]: the rate of depletion so it is all fine if you're you know building lot of buildings
[Guest]: highways flyovers etc but if you're devastating your natural capital at a very fast rate soon
[Guest]: you will run out of those resources required at least some amount of those resources are
[Guest]: required and this you currently you don't have any indicator which is part of your conventional
[Guest]: economic measurement tools so you need to integrate that and that work is going on and
[Guest]: will take some time for us to arrive at a sort of reliable this thing but that for so
[Guest]: those those are some sort of reforms or this thing which can take us forward at the same
[Guest]: time I think this dashboard idea also should be pursued so at mint for instance we had
[Guest]: done a very simple sort of thing we used to look at 16 high frequency monthly indicators
[Guest]: is valid the mint macro tracker look at for producer economy indicators for consumer economy
[Guest]: for ease of living and for external sector indicators and just give tell the readers
[Guest]: whether out of the 16 8 are doing better than the past 12 are doing better than the past
[Guest]: or not and use some standard easily explainable metrics on how we are doing the normalization
[Guest]: and so on and in some ways is not a very original idea if you read this book GDP a brief but
[Guest]: affectionate history by Diane Coyle she also mentions that that eventually I think we should
[Guest]: consider this dashboard approach and so on we just thought we'll put it into practice
[Guest]: in this when a lot of financial market analysts also look at these kind of dashboard metrics
[Guest]: so it is not that everyone relies blindly on GDP data before putting in the money or
[Guest]: before investing even sections within the government within the RBI look at broader
[Guest]: range of indicators but among all of them GDP will still remain important we should
[Guest]: as you said rightly we should use them knowing that they are shorthand that you know they
[Guest]: are not the whole story their metrics but that is true of almost any statistic if we
[Guest]: extend that logic that you know it is incomplete and therefore we should not use it then we
[Guest]: might as well stop using averages or the arithmetic mean and in fact if you look at the history
[Guest]: of statistics in the history of the world before mean median mode started to be used
[Guest]: it was far poorer and it this was a tremendous discovery that using mean median mode you
[Guest]: could you know make sense of the world and convey it to a simple audience so I think
[Guest]: it the production of statistics the evolution of statistics is also cool you know it happened
[Guest]: co-evolved with the evolution of the economy and the polity so because we are democracy
[Guest]: because different democracies sprung up in different parts of the world and because the
[Guest]: economy became more complex it is a combination of these two processes that has created the
[Guest]: need for these measures to get a better sense of ourselves and to plan for a better future
[Guest]: which is a very sort of realistic sort of even if it is not through soviet-style planning
[Amit Varma]: yeah diane call's book is wonderful and i'm also sort of reminded of that old saying that
[Amit Varma]: you know all models are wrong some models are useful so i think that's something that
[Amit Varma]: you can look at certain kinds of data and say that fine you know the model may not be
[Amit Varma]: exactly right if you're going to interrogate it to the finest detail but is it useful or
[Guest]: not and what can you and if i may just add to that in the same vein this is also the
[Guest]: saying i forget who who says that it is easier to lie without statistics than with statistics
[Amit Varma]: yeah so you can still lie but you can eliminate some possibilities of lying yeah when you
[Amit Varma]: have some statistics well that's a fantastic saying the other thing that sort of strikes
[Amit Varma]: me is that like number one my uh provocative question wasn't designed to suggest that uh
[Amit Varma]: we don't need data in fact i think we need data more than ever except that now i think
[Amit Varma]: uh the demand for data is a bottom-up demand like statistical systems originated from this
[Amit Varma]: top-down impulse where the state is saying that we need to design this chessboard and
[Amit Varma]: run it properly so we need the data now i think the reason data is important from where
[Amit Varma]: i stand is because people citizens like us need to be empowered with information about
[Amit Varma]: what is the state of the economy to be able to judge governance like in a democracy if
[Amit Varma]: you are going to vote for people who govern us on what basis are we going to vote exactly
[Amit Varma]: data is absolutely critical to that now what strikes me is that data like even though i
[Amit Varma]: understand that within the state there are institutions which have been running independently
[Amit Varma]: well set up stocked with good people over a period of time it seems inevitable to me
[Amit Varma]: that as more and more institutions of the state are co-opted and used in the service
[Amit Varma]: of politics that a lot of that data becomes suspect or as has happened in recent times
[Amit Varma]: just stops coming out altogether you have less and less data to work with and therefore
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that just as you know the impetus came from the state and all these institutions
[Amit Varma]: collecting data were from the state today if the impetus is bottom up from the citizen
[Amit Varma]: then i would imagine that there would more and more be a movement to get this data collection
[Amit Varma]: and have these institutions replaced by private institutions at least supplemented by private
[Amit Varma]: institutions now in your experience how much of that has been happening like you told of
[Amit Varma]: your dashboard with 16 monthly indicators how many of them were data collected by the
[Amit Varma]: state how many were independent like did you feel that you have to do jugar in certain
[Amit Varma]: ways of trying to figure out what the hell is happening like just an estimation of the
[Amit Varma]: size of the economy in a sense involves some jugar because you don't know the informal
[Amit Varma]: economy for example so you're using proxies and you're doing all of that and you're coming
[Amit Varma]: to the best estimate that you can in good faith how has that landscape kind of evolved
[Amit Varma]: for you because i would imagine that even a jugaru way of doing things could lead to
[Amit Varma]: a new way of looking at the world also because just in finding these proxies you might discover
[Amit Varma]: interesting ways of seeing the economy as it were so tell me your experience of all
[Amit Varma]: of this over the last few years because i imagine it must kind of be a mix of both great
[Amit Varma]: frustration and great innovation you know always trying to build the best picture you
[Guest]: can but not having the tools necessarily to work with that yeah absolutely right so i
[Guest]: would like to say that number of the overall data availability has gone up and it has gone
[Guest]: up hugely and it is largely public data there is some amount of private data also but much
[Guest]: of the volume has come up and it is very useful for just to give a simple example you didn't
[Guest]: have vehicle registration data on a daily basis it was unthinkable 10 years ago or so
[Guest]: you know now you have that kind of data so you can track you know at a state level even
[Guest]: beyond and different kinds of vehicle getting sold whether this is commercial vehicle whether
[Guest]: it is a personal vehicle two-wheeler four-wheeler and that also tells you a lot about the state
[Guest]: of the economy four-wheeler sales are going up if used cars are getting sold but two wheelers
[Guest]: are not getting sold then certain parts of the economy are not doing well if commercial
[Guest]: vehicles are getting sold at a higher rate that means there is probably chance that the
[Guest]: capacity utilization of factories are going up so these have economic significance and
[Guest]: they help us and we have used them as thoroughly as we can and they have been of great help
[Guest]: in recent years apart from that we have used some amount of private data from CMI now CMI
[Guest]: is a job survey I do have some reservations about those are methodological in nature it
[Guest]: is not because it is a private body it is just that the survey method is something that
[Guest]: has raised a lot of questions and I think those questions have not yet been satisfactorily
[Guest]: answered maybe they will revise their methodology and future rounds will be different but there
[Guest]: is still a problem especially when it comes to survey data because think of it this way
[Guest]: when you do a survey you want it to be representative of the population right what that means is
[Guest]: every individual in the country should have an equal probability of being selected equal
[Guest]: chance of being selected they will not be selected but they should have an equal chance
[Guest]: there should not be a bias in that so if you think of it as a machine which is spitting
[Guest]: out someone's name Amit Verma, Pramit Bhattacharya the number of times if it is an infinite sort
[Guest]: of game then the number of times Amit Verma is uttered should be the same as Pramit Bhattacharya
[Guest]: if there are only one Amit Verma and one Pramit Bhattacharya there are many more Amit Vermas
[Amit Varma]: so then it will depend on the number of Amit Vermas there are in the country and whether
[Guest]: if there are more Amit Vermas than Pramit Bhattacharya their number should be called
[Guest]: out more so that is the logic of probability sampling to execute that logic in a flawless
[Guest]: way you then need a list of people of the country and further when you do it in the
[Guest]: real life you because you are segregating by region you need a adequate representation
[Guest]: of gender region caste and so on you need much more finite details at the ground level
[Guest]: local level what they call the primary sampling unit or the first stage sampling unit as NSS
[Guest]: calls or used to call I don't know what they call them now now for a survey organization
[Guest]: like the national sample survey and they have they come with the authority of the state
[Guest]: they can ask the election commission for data they can use electoral rolls they have other
[Guest]: administrative they can even look at the census raw data and from that frame they can select
[Guest]: a representative sample CMI can't do that so there's a legal sort of limitation in how
[Guest]: far they can do although people have you private researchers and servers have also used electoral
[Guest]: rules but to the best of my knowledge CMI has not or it uses something else I'm not
[Guest]: sure but I mean this is what from what I could understood that there is there in at least
[Guest]: in certain states in certain parts of the country there are problems in trying to get
[Guest]: fully representative samples that is one issue the other issue is to consider that at the
[Guest]: end of the day all of much of these statistics are also public goods right they're non-rivalrous
[Guest]: and non-excludable right so you can use it for different purpose I can use it and we
[Guest]: can both use it without diminishing in the value of that statistics and the originator
[Guest]: of the statistics is not able to fully capture the value generated by that survey or the
[Guest]: data set and public goods if it is if some particular good is by definition public good
[Guest]: similarly think of think of something like pandemic management right no however rich
[Guest]: a man is wealthy a man is or a firm is whether it be Mr. Ambani or Mr. Adani or so they do
[Guest]: not have that kind of incentive to prevent a pandemic in India Mr. Narendra Modi does
[Guest]: because he heads the state the state does yeah so as the representative of the chief
[Guest]: representative of the state he has that responsibility so all kinds of public goods have that kind
[Guest]: of a feature that if we don't have that statistic something will go wrong you know they have
[Guest]: that negative kind of connotation also that if you don't have we can't plan or if you
[Guest]: don't have then we can't do this so there is that element which then means that when
[Guest]: they're collected by official state agencies they're collected as a measure of public good
[Guest]: not specifically because some companies which are going to buy that data are going to benefit
[Guest]: from it in CMI's case some some of their sales will obviously happen to think tanks and academics
[Guest]: and so on and it is in the nature of quasi public good but they want private returns
[Guest]: for it and reasonably so they are not funded by taxpayers at the same time much of their
[Guest]: funds will also come from private marketers and so on who are actually interested in the
[Guest]: consumer economy they are not interested in the entirety of the Indian economy and there
[Guest]: is a dissonance between the two and it is going to remain for the foreseeable future
[Guest]: right so if you are 90 percent of your sales are coming from 40 percent or 50 percent of
[Guest]: the consumers you can ignore the rest of the 40 50 percent right you are interested in
[Guest]: the as much data as you can about that and if you look at at least as far as I could
[Guest]: make it from CMI's sampling strategy it it sort of reflects that pattern there is much
[Guest]: more deeper sampling of urban units heterogeneous or small towns big cities etc etc which even
[Guest]: NSS doesn't do and the rural parts are all clubbed together and for rural states like
[Guest]: say Assam or Bihar you will have very two or three such aggregate blocks whereas for
[Guest]: a state like Tamil Nadu well you will have many more blocks from which random samples
[Guest]: will be drawn so the entire approach the entire methodology therefore everything is shaped
[Guest]: up by what a survey or a data set is designed for and hence it is important to so the role
[Guest]: of the state and the role in in production of statistics in creation of statistics will
[Guest]: remain which leads to the conflict that you talked about that if the state is producing
[Guest]: statistics and when the state we mean that it is not just the state it is a government
[Guest]: right the Modi government the Manmohan Singh government and they have a vested interest
[Guest]: in not showing us statistics that throw a dark light on them right in recent years these
[Guest]: have come up enough you know forefront earlier years also there were attempts in many cases
[Guest]: Sener versus prevailed and the data was finally released or the survey was commissioned despite
[Guest]: some opposition but in some cases they were not and then whether that decision to discontinue
[Guest]: the survey or hold back is because of public interest or because of the interest of the
[Guest]: survival of the government becomes the key question so then what do you do one is to
[Guest]: say that let's forget about government statistics and they just rely on alternative metrics
[Guest]: or let's look at third party sort of surveys or like let's look at surveys which are designed
[Guest]: for a certain purpose but which are also throwing up ancillary data which then can be used to
[Guest]: cross triangulate and figure out what is happening in the country so to some extent that approach
[Guest]: can be used so for instance when the NFHS 2015-16 numbers came up we use that to look
[Guest]: at how affluence had shifted from 2005-6 to 15-16 that is not what NFHS is designed for
[Guest]: they were they this is a primarily demographic and health survey but to assess how demographic
[Guest]: and health behavior and outcomes vary across different groups they were collecting data
[Guest]: on a range of household assets and amenities from which we could also design a asset index
[Guest]: and amenities index which we did and therefore we showed and we showed that you know the
[Guest]: divide between the western half of the country and the eastern half of the country which
[Guest]: the 2011 census showed still exists in 2015-16 so that geographical inequality has not changed
[Guest]: and similarly by education education in 2015-16 if I remember correctly played a much larger
[Guest]: role in shaping which wealth quintile you are in which wealth group you are in which
[Guest]: class you are in compared to earlier so that again showed you know that this formalization
[Guest]: everything that is happening is surely happening but it is if you are not able to educate your
[Guest]: kids or whatever then you are at a greater risk of falling behind and this of course
[Guest]: for the pandemic it means that then those dropouts which we are seeing and who will
[Guest]: continue to drop out if remedial action is not taken are going to suffer income losses
[Guest]: throughout their lifetime so these are these are feridial consequences and so this is one
[Guest]: way of dealing with this issue but the problem is this is a one-step thing if more and more
[Guest]: people start doing this then later on in the next round the government may say that okay
[Guest]: let's shorten this wealth questionnaire okay why do we need so long list of household amenities
[Guest]: so let's wait for the census and once in 10 years we'll know why in between you want to
[Guest]: tell people what is happening to assets and amenities you know how many toilets are getting
[Guest]: built and all that you know let's not have that data let's wait for the census so it's
[Guest]: convenient to then sort of discontinue that if there is no strong public pressure and
[Guest]: if this does not come out in the public openly and not enough people shout against it so
[Guest]: that danger is there and it is real I am not denying for a moment and the second part is
[Guest]: that this use of proxies or cross-tangulation works only to some extent sometimes you need
[Guest]: exactly that survey that so you can calculate multi-dimensional poverty from NFHS but consumption
[Guest]: poverty you need a consumption survey you cannot calculate from NFHS and it will be
[Guest]: wrong to do so and it won't be comparable with your poverty estimates of the past because
[Guest]: they were done using a different survey so then you lose that connection with the past
[Guest]: you are not able to measure your progress as a society which is what you want as a voter
[Guest]: or as a citizen that is where the role of fresh institutions new institutions come in
[Guest]: so I don't think that you can do away with institutions completely right all our institutions
[Guest]: are problematic whether it be the media the army the courts and over the past decade or
[Guest]: so there has been a backlash against all of the institutions including politicians but
[Guest]: I think we can't take this too far institutions will always remain imperfect we have to make
[Guest]: the best out of it we can't give up and say that look this is not working and let's throw
[Guest]: everything out the point is how do you how do you how do you improve and how do you make
[Guest]: it work for more and more people rather than a few the same with statistics you need a
[Guest]: way to ensure that there is independent regulation right because same with the Election Commission
[Guest]: right you can say that a government will become so powerful that it will appoint whoever it
[Guest]: wants as a chief election commission and through that mechanism manipulate and probably to
[Guest]: some extent it happens but because it is ordained in the Constitution that it has to function
[Guest]: under certain norms and those norms can't be changed unless the Parliament recommends
[Guest]: and there is so much glare and media attention on how and why certain decisions are taken
[Guest]: and if an election at least one election commissioner is honest and wants to reveal what has happened
[Guest]: he or she can easily do so in today's day and world there is certain amount of check
[Guest]: and balance to ensure free and fair elections right it may not be enough we may need to
[Guest]: put in additional measures in the coming years and I do think some some part of election
[Guest]: funding the way elections are conducted need to be revisited and we need much more stronger
[Guest]: teeth than we have but it doesn't mean that we throw away the Election Commission or we
[Guest]: assume that let's give the power to the state and anyway it is the state everything is the
[Guest]: state so I have a different Commission let's have an election ministry which will conduct
[Guest]: election right so the same here you have a statistics ministry but that is not the regulator
[Guest]: that is the producer so you need a separate arm which is the regulator and auditor of
[Guest]: statistics and as you said given the public demand for credible data which has been growing
[Guest]: and I myself have seen this you know a lot of a lot of readers a lot of people who use
[Guest]: data come up and ask you know why is this happening this way why is this a lot of my
[Guest]: questions my stories happen because of that you know otherwise I would not have been forced
[Guest]: to pursue many stories which I otherwise did and to answer those questions and to come
[Guest]: up with honest answers you need you definitely need better institutions you need a proper
[Guest]: independent statutory National Statistical Commission not the kind of lame-duck body
[Guest]: that we have been reduced to and the plan for that was already there in the Ranganathan
[Guest]: Commission as I said that you need an institutional approach and there have been many attempts
[Guest]: to do it the bureaucracy and the political system as a whole has not never been interested
[Guest]: so right from UPA to current NDA government no one has pursued it seriously but I do hope
[Guest]: this growing interest in data this growing interest in understanding statistical system
[Guest]: will make more and more people question how this data is coming what are the checks and
[Guest]: balances to ensure that it is independent and will eventually prod our representatives
[Guest]: to consider ways to ring fence and safeguard it so I'm partly optimistic on that and given
[Amit Varma]: that most of this data is produced by the state has there been an impact on the quality
[Amit Varma]: and quantity of the data coming through in the last few years and if so is it part of
[Amit Varma]: a continuing trend that was there anyway or would you say it's something specific to perhaps
[Amit Varma]: this dispensation that as the economy is gone and the economy honestly has been going down
[Amit Varma]: from UPA to which it's not something to do just with this government but as far as data
[Amit Varma]: purely is concerned is there a trend that you see is there something we need to worry
[Amit Varma]: about about both the release of data and the quality of data being sort of dependent on
[Guest]: whatever the politics of the time may be yes so one part is to a large part it is structural
[Guest]: it is not because of this dispensation so I'm very clear on that did this government
[Guest]: take remedial steps to make it better or did it make it worse I think it made it worse
[Guest]: there is no doubt about that as well in what concrete ways if you can expand so for instance
[Guest]: when this entire GDP controversy erupted initially they allowed people like Arvind Subramaniam
[Guest]: and Raghuram Rajan who were then respectively chief economic advisor and the RBI governor
[Guest]: to express their criticism of the new numbers if you if you remember they expressed very
[Guest]: publicly even the economic survey had a small box item questioning or raising questions
[Guest]: about the GDP puzzle and so on but gradually a this people left and others came in and
[Guest]: overall government spokesperson started behaving as if this GDP numbers represented the gospel
[Guest]: truth and instead of appointing an independent review which was required and which has happened
[Guest]: with other data sets at other points in time I remember when this IIP controversy first
[Guest]: erupted around mid 2001 Mounsingh had actually asked for a review of that and that report
[Guest]: was not made public but the National Statistical Commission examined that and had recommended
[Guest]: certain changes of which were done and the person who authored that report R.B Burman
[Guest]: is a ex-RBI statistician who he later became the NSC chairman also so there were precedents
[Guest]: where you in the Indian data system itself where you appoint people from outside who
[Guest]: are not involved in producing that statistic to a statistics to examine it and there are
[Guest]: mechanisms to do it you could have used the NSC to appoint such experts and review it
[Guest]: they did not do so B you could have accepted that okay fine let us continue with this it
[Guest]: may not be that problematic but let us also look at other metrics and to measure the health
[Guest]: of the economy and maybe go for a revision quickly before the five-year cycle and then
[Guest]: ensure that the data gaps that were not filled are filled in time so that the next revision
[Guest]: incorporates all those methodological changes and we build a more robust system that effort
[Guest]: also did not happen much later in 2019 when I broke that story about NSS survey finding
[Guest]: that part of the database of companies was wrong and companies were missing from the
[Guest]: list when they went out to survey around that time they said that we'll set up this committee
[Guest]: to examine the role of deflators because that also had was a bone of contention and then
[Guest]: I don't recall anything happening after that so when certain controversies they do come
[Guest]: up in the knee-jerk reaction then they also said at that point that there would be this
[Guest]: new NSC bill which they again didn't publish until much later and then that too in a very
[Guest]: diluted form from what it was originally intended to so there were this knee-jerk reactions
[Guest]: to various things but there was no systematic effort to improve or reform the statistical
[Guest]: system or give it some autonomy if not independence and make it answerable to you know an independent
[Guest]: rather the National Statistical Commission's powers were gradually and informally eroded
[Guest]: and survey data was unnecessarily politicized during the 2019 elections they questioned
[Guest]: the employment and jobs data they said it is not fit for use and just after the elections
[Guest]: they released it not just they released it now almost every other publication whether
[Guest]: it be NITIA or PMA AC or anyone they continue using the PLFS data they compare it with pass
[Guest]: round without any question showing that this entire drama and tamasha that they created
[Guest]: during 2019 was political in nature and that harms the credibility of the statistical that
[Guest]: undermines the moral of statistical workers and you unnecessarily sort of drag on a statisticians
[Guest]: through a process in which they are made to feel that you know their efforts at sort of
[Guest]: preserving the integrity of the system has come to no avail and beyond that when this
[Guest]: National Statistical Commission was reconvened and so on many of its recommendations were
[Guest]: either ignored or informally lot of things happened where the ministry took the lead
[Guest]: decision such as not releasing the consumption survey results of 2019 the survey was in 2017-18
[Guest]: the decision was taken in 2019 the NSC was not even consulted and later when NSC which
[Guest]: is the legally the body that is supposed to take these decisions recommended that at least
[Guest]: the unit level data be released and that recommendation was rejected or it was not acted upon so there
[Guest]: were many of these sort of separate then there was this back series controversy so that entire
[Guest]: controversy was entirely political to lot of the GDP changes and division lot of people
[Guest]: say it is fudged I want to make it clear it's not fudged there are gaps in the data systems
[Guest]: we wanted to move to a newer way of evaluating GDP which was certainly more cutting edge
[Guest]: in the sense that the world had moved to that standard or was moving to that standard the
[Guest]: UN had recommended but we were not prepared for it the homework in terms of producing
[Guest]: those data sets which can then feed into that model was not built so we were not prepared
[Guest]: for it and we moved into it with not great results as expected you know you have to do
[Guest]: that homework before you move to that and we were not ready and this corporate database
[Guest]: was untested it was new even the statisticians were not sure whether it was a stable database
[Guest]: but they anyway went ahead with it so because of those reasons that GDP first controversy
[Guest]: arose the second controversy of back series was entirely political in nature where two
[Guest]: different back series was produced and the one that showed the NDA1 and the NDA2 in better
[Guest]: light was officially adopted and there were a lot of problems with that also and they
[Guest]: were not ready to discuss that the chief statistician refused to answer media queries on that so
[Guest]: there was a whole host of things that happened and even the sanitation survey you know that
[Guest]: was sought to be discredited thankfully they released the data with the caveat saying that
[Guest]: you know that part of but what was most unfortunate was the chief statistician wrote an op-ed
[Guest]: in collaboration with the sanitation secretary questioning his own ministry's survey data
[Guest]: and that was unprecedented you know till that point at least officially publicly no one
[Guest]: from the statistical establishment the leadership had questioned their own numbers and from
[Guest]: what I'm told he was very keen to extricate gain an extension and perhaps it is those
[Guest]: so public choice theory says that every person acts because of his or her own incentives
[Guest]: and perhaps that applied more than I don't think anyone told him to write that op-ed
[Guest]: it was the good part of the the end the end to that story is that that person did not
[Guest]: get an extension despite his minister recommending it so I'm told PMO shot it down so one negative
[Guest]: side of the story is that there's this evidence that there's over centralization PMO is getting
[Guest]: involved in a lot of things but the flips are the other side of the story is that despite
[Guest]: all that and despite all these attempts to please the you know despite trying to be more
[Guest]: loyal than the king that person particular did not get an extension so maybe there are
[Guest]: saner voices still in the government who do feel that beyond a point all this mud-slinging
[Guest]: on their own data will come back to haunt them because if you are questioning the employment
[Guest]: data today if you're questioning sanitation data today tomorrow people will question your
[Guest]: Swachh Bharat numbers people will question other numbers that you throw out and everything
[Guest]: will go for a toss so then even your genuine achievements will not be recognized as being
[Guest]: true and I think to some extent this realization may have seeped in that's my provisional and
[Amit Varma]: optimistic rating I may be wrong on this as we come close to winding up and you've been
[Amit Varma]: so patient with me a couple of final questions and the first one begins with the statement
[Amit Varma]: of a dilemma which is that human beings are not designed to deal with scale like our brains
[Amit Varma]: evolved in prehistoric times there is something called the Dunbar number and the Dunbar number
[Amit Varma]: basically is around 147 or 150 somewhere in that range what it basically demonstrates
[Amit Varma]: and study after study has shown it is true is that when it comes to faces and names that
[Amit Varma]: we can remember that we feel comfortable with that's a number of people we can beyond that
[Amit Varma]: the brain cannot process it and part of the reason is that our brains evolved in prehistoric
[Amit Varma]: times where we lived in tribes that were maximum that many people and we don't understand scale
[Amit Varma]: you know if you tell me something is 10 million this and some other thing is 1 billion that
[Amit Varma]: at an intellectual level I know the difference between 10 million and 1 billion but my eyes
[Amit Varma]: glaze over I can't kind of comprehend it and by me I don't mean me specifically because
[Amit Varma]: I'm superhuman I can comprehend anything but I mean the general person that our brains
[Amit Varma]: are not equipped to deal with scale our brains are not equipped to deal with large numbers
[Amit Varma]: that's one aspect the other aspect of how humans are built is that we have limited bandwidth
[Amit Varma]: limited energy and for rational reasons we have to focus on what has an immediate impact
[Amit Varma]: on our lives which is the things that we do in our everyday lives right like my concern
[Amit Varma]: right now after this is making sure the files got recorded okay and thinking about the edit
[Amit Varma]: and thinking about the release and I don't have time to look at government data and say
[Amit Varma]: key governance casa hair you know where is the poverty line and all of this and this
[Amit Varma]: is this is what you know public choice there is called rational ignorance that voters are
[Amit Varma]: not incentivized to actually find out enough about governance because of all these reasons
[Amit Varma]: they have bigger priorities and that they realize one vote will not make a difference
[Amit Varma]: which is most of the time it's true I believe there was an outlier case in some local election
[Amit Varma]: in UP where a guy lost by one vote and his wife and the wife sister hadn't come to vote
[Amit Varma]: so he got upset with them but regardless of that and that might even be apocryphal but
[Amit Varma]: the point being that so we have these dilemmas where one our brain can't handle numbers two
[Amit Varma]: it is actually not in our interest to look too deeply into the functioning of these things
[Amit Varma]: because we'll spend too much time trying to process it so we develop shortcuts and heuristics
[Amit Varma]: now one common shortcut and heuristic is a tribal one that you choose your tribe and
[Amit Varma]: by tribe I mean like it could be a political party which is the Congress or whatever or
[Amit Varma]: it could be your caste or whatever grouping you choose or whatever vote bank you choose
[Amit Varma]: to be part of and you say okay I'll just go with them that's where my loyalty is to again
[Amit Varma]: our brains are wired in a sense to prefer strong leaders because if you're living in
[Amit Varma]: tribes and tribes are always fighting with each other you want your leader to be the
[Amit Varma]: biggest manliest most macho guy out there so you're always going to pick a you know
[Amit Varma]: a Modi over over someone else I won't take names so that macho-ness kind of helps and
[Amit Varma]: we gravitate towards strongman leaders and ignoring other aspects of this all of these
[Amit Varma]: are a dilemma because as we agreed you know data is crucial to the functioning of a democracy
[Amit Varma]: because data is what tells citizens are their governments doing a good job apart from the
[Amit Varma]: anecdotal evidence of their eyes and therefore it's important now as a data person you obviously
[Amit Varma]: know the importance of this you were speaking earlier about how you try so hard to make
[Amit Varma]: data accessible so everybody gets it how big a challenge do you think that is what are
[Amit Varma]: the learnings you have learned while trying to figure out ways to make data accessible
[Amit Varma]: to make it interesting for everybody you know what else can we do like if other data journalists
[Amit Varma]: or people who are suddenly curious and say that hey this seems worth my time I want to
[Amit Varma]: do this you know what advice would you give what are the different ways in which we can
[Amit Varma]: get past this huge gap and make people care about data and understand data without necessarily
[Guest]: having to have them spend too much time on it so you mean advice as citizens how do we
[Amit Varma]: know both as citizens what kind of data do I look at but typically there'll be shortcuts
[Amit Varma]: and heuristics one is you could pick a tribe two is you can pick somebody you trust like
[Amit Varma]: when it came to covid there was such a fog of war who do you trust so I picked scientists
[Amit Varma]: like Eric Topol or journalists like Zainab Tufekci or epidemiologists however you pronounce
[Amit Varma]: that like Gautam Menon and Gagandeep Kang and Brahman Mukherjee and so after a certain
[Amit Varma]: point of time I realized I can trust these people and Gautam was on my show as well and
[Amit Varma]: you can you can use heuristics like that but in general I don't think the common person
[Amit Varma]: because of rational ignorance is going to go to the source of the data and read World
[Amit Varma]: Bank reports and look at MIME data and all of that so at some level that gap of comprehension
[Amit Varma]: of building those narratives that cannot tell the truth have to be filled by people like
[Amit Varma]: you which you've been so what's your approach how difficult a problem do you think it is
[Amit Varma]: because sometimes it boggles me I think it's almost insurmountable especially in these
[Amit Varma]: modern times where people want to believe what narrative they want to believe facts
[Guest]: be damned so how do you look at that so it is difficult but it is also rewarding and
[Guest]: the two aspects to this one is that yes people do want to live in their own eco chambers
[Guest]: these are as you said modern tribes and you want to do virtue signaling within your own
[Guest]: network and you don't want to engage with the outside luckily because of my own personal
[Guest]: history and various other things I have always had interactions with different groups and
[Guest]: different ideologies and so on so I always cared for what people who may not agree with
[Guest]: me on most things think about my writing and my work and my data work and one way I have
[Guest]: ensured this is that I've always cared for whether they believe in my charts even if
[Guest]: they don't believe in the text I wrote plus the other thing we always made sure was we
[Guest]: published all charts online in Data Wrapper so anyone can in a Data Wrapper chart download
[Guest]: the data in a CSV format and anyone who knows Excel can recalculate and figure out and at
[Guest]: least for a financial audience which Mint serves people have that basic Excel skill
[Guest]: so if I am distorting the axis or doing some very elementary statistical manipulation to
[Guest]: distort the data or tell half the story everyone can catch me so by giving out that data in
[Guest]: that form it is a signal to an intelligent reader that I'm confident of my numbers and
[Guest]: my analysis and then if you still disagree you can go ahead and use it the way you want
[Guest]: to or if you want to spin a different tale you can use that as well and people have done
[Guest]: it they've used parts of our story to highlight narratives that they want to project that
[Guest]: you can't control but broadly for general reader who is not into that mission into those
[Guest]: mission information campaigns that is what we follow and so if I were to think back as
[Guest]: a reader I think we you know those things do make a difference and you're right for
[Guest]: to expect every reader to go through every source for every report and all this is not
[Guest]: possible but the very basic thing that a reader can do is to see whether there is any source
[Guest]: at all so sometimes you know friends and others send me maps and charts which go viral on
[Guest]: social media and the first thing I check is whether there is a source if it is not there
[Guest]: I tell them that I can't proceed and you should also not trust it so there's a map of which
[Guest]: book is translated most in which part of the world and so on but there's no source and
[Guest]: incidentally Tyler Cowen had linked to it in Marginal Revolution and someone sent it
[Guest]: to me an economics professor so I told him that I can't trust it and nor should you maybe
[Guest]: someone just made it as a joke that person was very upset Alice in Wonderland was the
[Guest]: most translated work in Britain or it was the most popular book something of that sort
[Guest]: so that is just a trivial example but there are serious examples where people spread misinformation
[Guest]: through that way and this is one easy way the other is has anyone else written off about
[Guest]: it if it is a prominent data source if it is a prominent this thing then someone else
[Guest]: would definitely in today's world it cannot go completely unnoticed or you know uncommented
[Guest]: so that at least that much effort I think we should expect a engaged sort of citizenry
[Guest]: to do and that they should do and the third part is that we should follow the stories
[Guest]: about what is happening to these data some of them the schedules are known when is the
[Guest]: data set supposed to be released why is it not being released so generally should follow
[Guest]: those up and as readers we should engage with those stories and we should do our best to
[Guest]: sort of share them and engage with them and I do find more and more readers are interested
[Guest]: in so the way I think of it is that compared to say 15 years ago there is a much more larger
[Guest]: audience today for these kind of stories and if you think of it from a long-term historical
[Guest]: point of view that is quite natural our educational attainments have gone up various other metrics
[Guest]: have gone up the use of math in the workplace has gone up and it is set to grow up more
[Guest]: data itself is becoming data science itself is becoming more and more important in a wide
[Guest]: variety of fields so you will have many many many many more professionals will be using
[Guest]: data in their professional lives now not all of them will be statistical experts not all
[Guest]: of them will be experts in economic statistics but they will have a broad sense and if they
[Guest]: want to contribute more you want to dig out data and do tell stories of a please do so
[Guest]: but I would encourage people to first pick a subfield maybe it is cricket maybe it is
[Guest]: movies whatever interests you maybe it is the economy and then look at all the public
[Guest]: data sources that is there you know today if you know a little bit of coding you know
[Guest]: understand basic statistics you can come up with intelligent charts and narratives and
[Guest]: you can start doing that work on your own and you can at least cross-check certain numbers
[Guest]: lot of there are a lot of community efforts there is an open data community in India there
[Guest]: is this group called data meet which I am also part of Rukmini is part of most data
[Guest]: analysts I think are part of where we share resources we help each other out if there
[Guest]: are queries and I have also benefited from them apart from that there is a broader sort
[Guest]: of open data community which pushes various organizations to release their data in a csv
[Guest]: open access format or a machine readable format so that they can be used by the wider public
[Guest]: and you can never predict which data set will finally be used widely which will throw new
[Guest]: light on the functioning of the state or the functioning of the economy or tell us something
[Guest]: new and who will do it but eventually it has a way of you know it's like the sort of in
[Guest]: some way the invisible hand of the system that leads people to these things and whoever
[Guest]: is interested is able to come up with things that others have have not been yet able to
[Guest]: say or throw new light on this thing and that's how we advance our understanding of ourselves
[Amit Varma]: and our world we're going to your advice to data journalists part of the question would
[Amit Varma]: you say that it's important if you want to be a data journalist today to not just learn
[Amit Varma]: data and statistics but also to learn storytelling yes definitely very much so and what are the
[Amit Varma]: important sort of hacks or broad principles that you might have learned over time of turning
[Guest]: data into compelling stories one is and which again came from my former boss Niranjan is
[Guest]: to learn what to give up you know leave out so you after you've done all your calculations
[Guest]: you have done all your work you have to leave out maybe 90 to 95% of what you've done so
[Guest]: that elimination is often tricky and often we get attached to some you know special effort
[Guest]: we have made in a certain direction but that may not be the most relevant so you have to
[Guest]: keep the reader in mind that sympathy for the reader is most important and that guides
[Guest]: every other decision that you make so that is at the core of things and that leads to
[Guest]: that elimination so that is one be as I said if you have some specialization maybe it is
[Guest]: the economy maybe it is politics maybe it is sports maybe it is something else that
[Guest]: also helps because then you do by iteration you keep on doing stories around particular
[Guest]: databases you get a better hang of it and you also start engaging with the producers
[Guest]: of statistics so I think that is very important in fact in some of sometimes when I'm asked
[Guest]: to lecture at J school journalism schools I tell them that there's a lot of attention
[Guest]: on the GDP but you guys should pay more attention on the DGP the data generating process and
[Guest]: that helps you know whether it is corporate data whether it is coming from SEBI whether
[Guest]: it is financial data coming from RBI whether it is GDP coming data coming from CSO look
[Guest]: behind who is collecting the data what is their incentives who is providing the data
[Guest]: what is their incentive what are the level of checks is it by an external auditor how
[Guest]: many are market analysts tracking it why is the data of a startup less reliable than that
[Guest]: of a listed company you know because there is there are more people who are tracking
[Guest]: it the checks and balances in a market in a stock market are much more and so these
[Guest]: are just some basic sort of rules of thumb that that you apply and finally I think when
[Guest]: you when you come to charts there is this misconception that it should dazzle the readers
[Guest]: and therefore it can sometimes a simple line chart with one or two annotations can be much
[Guest]: more effective than any grand visualization and we have often seen that that is more effective
[Guest]: in storytelling so think about that as well carefully and always remember that misinformed
[Guest]: as the one of my favorite writers Tim Harford says in his latest book how to make the world
[Guest]: add up misinformation can always can also be very beautiful so just because there is
[Guest]: a very stunning piece of graphic it doesn't mean it is true not just because it has gone
[Guest]: viral on social media without a source but also because the producer of that statistic
[Guest]: may not have done enough work to say normalize the data suppose you put India China and various
[Guest]: other countries in many metrics India or China will come up as number three number four in
[Guest]: the world that does not mean anything yet almost on daily basis you will see headlines
[Guest]: not just in India but across globally that India is number two in this number four in
[Guest]: this China is number three number one in that's just the population effect so at least normalize
[Amit Varma]: the population India is number one in terms of podcast length and it's all because of
[Amit Varma]: me so three final questions see I'm so precise three final questions and the third last one
[Amit Varma]: has a thought experiment let's say that one day you're sitting at a cafe and suddenly
[Amit Varma]: the cafe empties out and Mukesh Ambani walks in and he walks up to you and you realize
[Amit Varma]: the cafe has been emptied out so he can have a private conversation with you and he sits
[Amit Varma]: down and he says young man I heard your podcast with Amit I am very impressed contrary to
[Amit Varma]: impressions in some quarters I am deeply concerned about this nation I want to help our democracy
[Amit Varma]: and especially I want to help it in the context of data of helping people understand data
[Amit Varma]: of building institutions that can produce worthwhile data just this whole cause everything
[Amit Varma]: that we've been speaking about I will give you a thousand crores or I will I have a thousand
[Guest]: crores to spend what should I do send one crore each to all the MPs along with my draft
[Guest]: of a National Statistical Commission bill ask them to vote on it as yes okay I didn't
[Guest]: understand that break it up for me so there are already attempts to reform the National
[Guest]: Statistical Commission see I don't think I have the power to change the statistical system
[Amit Varma]: at best I can point people in certain direction but you don't but Ambani ji he does know Mukesh
[Guest]: Bhai so that's why I'm saying with his wealth the best thing you can do is to bribe the
[Guest]: MPs to vote on a bill which is required for the country so tell me more about this bill
[Amit Varma]: what what does it propose to do like I'm trying to imagine a future landscape in which this
[Amit Varma]: problem is solved or at least in which this problem is not such a big problem yes it won't
[Guest]: be solved fully but to a large extent there will be an independent regulatory body with
[Guest]: an initial corpus of hundred crores of its own to conduct statistical research and so
[Guest]: on so on the one hand it will innovate and produce new kinds of statistics on the other
[Guest]: it will be a new sort of regulator of the statistical system so what think of the think
[Guest]: of it as the CAG of the statistical system so it will audit all the government department
[Guest]: it will examine whether the processes that exist today to collect data whether it be
[Guest]: for an Anganwadi whether it be for COVID deaths whether it be for IIP or whether it be for
[Guest]: GDP so it will look at all this there will be different departments or different members
[Guest]: look looking into each of this and they will evaluate whether certain core principles of
[Guest]: statistics are being followed whether certain transparency principles are being followed
[Guest]: and they will publish all their findings and this thing in a transparent they will be accessible
[Guest]: they will be answerable to the Parliament of course but to the wider public at large
[Guest]: see one of the basic recommendations is that even the current National Statistical Commission
[Guest]: should publish the minutes of meetings in a separate website the website name was domain
[Guest]: name was registered nothing happened so even basic things like this can make a difference
[Guest]: I have always believed that it is it is you know this interaction with public and state
[Guest]: authorities that will make the difference one person unknown or you know one institution
[Guest]: just left on its own is not going to produce change there has to be a system of checks
[Guest]: and balances and there has to be a system of accountability to the wider public I strongly
[Amit Varma]: believe in that excellent I love that you gave me such a concrete answer and my further
[Amit Varma]: message to Mukesh Bhai if he is listening to this is one kindly listen to Pramit and
[Amit Varma]: two you can send one crore to each of the MPs we have but we don't have a thousand MPs
[Amit Varma]: you'll have some money left over what do you do with it remember where you heard this support
[Amit Varma]: independent podcasting now my second last question is getting back to the personal which
[Amit Varma]: is that a lot of your work is a sort of indiscreet articles which are just kind of coming in
[Amit Varma]: mint and mint also has a subs link so the person who doesn't subscribe to mint may not
[Amit Varma]: get to read it are you planning to write a book anytime are you sort of you know it's
[Amit Varma]: that I mean taking inspiration from Rukmini who's just come out with a book I'm dying
[Amit Varma]: to read and that you had also some input into I believe is that part of your plans because
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure everybody would like to see you do that you know you very patiently answered
[Amit Varma]: all my questions during this talk but you obviously have way more insights and there
[Amit Varma]: are way more questions to answers and so on and so forth so like I really believe that
[Amit Varma]: good data journalists also have a duty as public intellectuals and I think our democracy
[Amit Varma]: needs that as well and in a sense that helps inspire data journalists of the future as
[Amit Varma]: well so is there anything like that in the work so will you at least start a newsletter
[Guest]: like I've been telling like we were talking about earlier so one is I'm not very comfortable
[Guest]: with the idea of me as a public intellectual so I'll rule that out book that's not something
[Amit Varma]: you choose that's something that kind of comes with the territory right maybe I am I just
[Guest]: feel that that makes you a bit distant from the people but anyway that's my own personal
[Guest]: sort of this thing maybe I don't like the phrasing of that or whatever or I don't think
[Guest]: of myself as that I think of myself more as a storyteller so books definitely I mean it's
[Guest]: part of the storytelling tradition and I know a lot of people feel that that can convey
[Guest]: at this moment I don't have a feel a compelling need to write a book newsletter yes definitely
[Guest]: that thought has crossed my mind I am evaluating it and if I feel that yes I can do something
[Guest]: which will add value to people who might be interested in what I have to say maybe I will
[Amit Varma]: start a newsletter and that's interesting like a digressive thought I was on a whatsapp
[Amit Varma]: conversation with some friends yesterday and one of them sent a couple of pages from this
[Amit Varma]: book he's reading which was written in the 60s I forget the name of the book but it's
[Amit Varma]: about the degradation of the word intellectual how it almost became a pejorative in certain
[Amit Varma]: circles and the point that the author there was making was that listen you know intelligent
[Amit Varma]: is not a bad word but intellectual seems to be a bad word and I think part of the reason
[Amit Varma]: for that is that it's been given a political tint just in the same way as you know the
[Amit Varma]: words liberal and progressive can also be used to you know as pejorative yeah but I
[Guest]: get what you're saying my discomfort is not at all from that so you're a Bengali you will
[Guest]: understand half Bengali so there is this thing called Atil, Atilvaj or Atil so my sense of
[Guest]: discomfort I think springs from that that you very soon become an Atil and you talk
[Guest]: about things so someone once told me and it was an unkind remark but I think there's a
[Guest]: kernel of truth in it that an intellectual talks about things he doesn't fully understand
[Amit Varma]: or doesn't have expertise in my counter to that would be that two of the gentlemen we
[Amit Varma]: mentioned earlier in the show Milton Friedman and Samuelson were public intellectuals and
[Amit Varma]: you know both of them influence a field to differing degrees and both of them influence
[Amit Varma]: a wider world out there to differing degrees Friedman certainly huge influence on me those
[Amit Varma]: are my models when you think of public intellectuals but I'll move on to my last question I mean
[Amit Varma]: why I mean this is a semantic issue anyway and my last question is this and it's a common
[Amit Varma]: one for many guests who come here that my listeners love to read as well contrary to
[Amit Varma]: popular perception people still read in this day and age people still crave depth so what
[Amit Varma]: I'd like you to do is recommend books which have meant a lot to you not necessarily to
[Amit Varma]: do with your field but just books which have meant a lot to you which might have changed
[Amit Varma]: the way you look at the world in some big or small way or even books which you might
[Amit Varma]: have read recently and are so excited about you want to stand on a soapbox and shout hey
[Guest]: everybody read this this is amazing yeah so I really liked I mean this is very recent
[Guest]: so it is in my memory Tim Harford's latest book how to make the world end up especially
[Guest]: one of the chapters is on biases and our interpretation of statistics which is I think a large part
[Guest]: of what we discussed today and I think he has some good answers on how to counter those
[Guest]: biases and for any citizen who is interested in evaluating the world around him or her
[Guest]: his or her country it's worth reading there is a section on big data which also is very
[Guest]: worth reading because this is big one become the new craze and Harford's take is a bit
[Guest]: critical and I think some of the arguments he makes what considering so that is one that
[Guest]: immediately comes to mind the other one is understanding statistics by Anthony Davis
[Guest]: a very small slim volume and if I'm not mistaken the PDF is available for free from the Cato
[Guest]: Institute which published it it is written with a slightly libertarian sort of perspective
[Guest]: but that does not detract from the book in any way if you do not believe in that ideology
[Guest]: the other part is it is it uses American examples to illustrate statistical concepts but even
[Guest]: that I think most readers will be able to sort of grasp and it's written in a very sort
[Guest]: of clear plain English and very basic sort of stuff but even some of the very basic stuff
[Guest]: sometimes we don't recognize even those with statistical training sometimes ignored so
[Guest]: I think it's valuable both for a lay beginner as well as someone who wants to refresh or
[Guest]: once wants to see how statistics is applied so for both sets of readers listeners etc.
[Guest]: it's a very valuable book this I read this year itself although this is a very old book
[Guest]: so the book is called the Antles of the Savannah it's by Chinua Achebe one of the most famous
[Guest]: writers to have emerged from Africa and he got his fame from earlier works and this is
[Guest]: quite a late book it was in 1980s late 1980s and it tells the story of three friends who
[Guest]: had studied together one becomes an advisor to the ruler or dictator or authoritarian
[Guest]: ruler whatever you want to call it and one is a journalist and the ruler the key advisor
[Guest]: and the journalist they're all sort of batch mates or had studied together and the differences
[Guest]: between them the ideological sort of disagreements how they navigate how it influences their
[Guest]: personal and political sort of lives and how things work and you feel that there's a lot
[Guest]: of lot of universality in the book in that it captures lot of you know some of our current
[Guest]: questions also quite brilliantly so I didn't like that and Elena Ferrante I already talked
[Guest]: about I finished the four-part Neapolitan series and see it's all it's obviously about
[Guest]: female friendship it's about it's about you know how to women sort of throughout their
[Guest]: life maintain that bond there is envy jealousy at the same time there is camaraderie there
[Guest]: is sharing there's caring that is a central sort of theme running through the entire series
[Guest]: but it is also a tale about inequality and how difficult it is for someone who is not
[Guest]: from a certain social class to make it and even after make making it feel a kind of an
[Guest]: imposter syndrome and there are some parts where one felt that you know whatever journalism
[Guest]: I do whatever ways I can write about inequality and I have written a lot one just fails to
[Guest]: you know capture it in the way that novelist or playwright would do so that is the third
[Guest]: is this I read during the pandemic The Gentleman in Moscow by M.R. Tawles I think that this
[Guest]: will be familiar to many more people it's also fairly recent a previous guest M.R Madhavan
[Guest]: also recommended this is one of his books yeah it had a very calming influence also
[Guest]: because I started reading it I think during the second wave when there was another lockdown
[Guest]: and this is also about a man in lockdown in some sense is locked up in a Russian hotel
[Guest]: and this entire you know this revolution and it's you know hype and all the way it disrupted
[Guest]: lives of people even those who believed in the revolution captures beautifully and it
[Guest]: also it also has a lot of I don't know there are a lot of parts to it the pace at which
[Guest]: the writer tells the story the philosophical aspects to it and the way it evolves and using
[Guest]: just that one hotel as a center of the plot basically everything happens there most of
[Guest]: the story unfolds in one hotel in Moscow and this is written by someone who is an American
[Amit Varma]: so that I actually gifted to a friend of mine and now in a sense you've gifted it to all
[Amit Varma]: of us so thank you for these great recommendations and I kind of agree that great art captures
[Amit Varma]: the human condition in a way that journalism sometimes can't do but journalism also fulfills
[Amit Varma]: functions that are necessary and unique so more power to you and all the work you do
[Amit Varma]: and thank you so much for spending so many hours chatting with me today I'm most grateful
[Guest]: thank you Amit it has been wonderful and it's been wonderful talking to you and I too learnt
[Amit Varma]: a lot
[Amit Varma]: if you enjoyed listening to this episode dive into the show notes enter rabbit holes at
[Amit Varma]: will you can follow Pramit on twitter at Pramit underscore B you can follow me at Amit Verma
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T B-A-R-M-A you can browse past episodes of the scene in the unseen at seen unseen
[Amit Varma]: dot I-N thank you for listening
[Amit Varma]: did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show you can go over to seen unseen dot I-N slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking thank you